I think sometimes that the two symbols of our present kind of technological culture are the rocket ship and the bulldozer. The rocket as a very, very phallic symbol of compensation for the sexually inadequate male. And the bulldozer, which ruthlessly pushes down hills and forests and alters the shape of the landscape. These are two symbols of the negative aspect of our technology. Im not going to take the position that technology is a mistake. I think that there could be a new kind of technology, using a new attitude. But the trouble is that a great deal of our power is wielded by men who I would call two oclock types.Maybe you saw an article I wrote in "Playboy" magazine called "The Circle of Sex," and it suggested at least a dozen sexual types rather than two. And that the men who are two oclock on the dial, like a clock, are men who are ambisexterous, named after Julius Ceasar, because Julius Ceasar was an ambisexterous man, and he equally made love to all his friends wives and to his good-looking officers. And he had no sense of guilt about this at all. Now, that type of male in this culture has a terrible sense of guilt, that he might be homosexual, and is scared to death of being one, and therefore he has to overcompensate for his masculinity. And so he comes on as a police officer, Marine sergeant, bouncer, bookie, general--tough, cigar-chewing, real masculine type who is never able to form a relationship with a woman; theyre just damesas far as hes concerned. But he, just like an ace Air Force pilot puts a little mark on his plane each time he shoots down an enemy, so this kind of man, every time he makes a dame he chalks up one, because that reassures him that he is after all a male. And hes a terrible nuisance. The trouble is that the culture doesnt permit him to recognize and accept his ambisexterity. And so hes a trouble spot. But that kind of spirit of knocking the world around is something that is causing serious danger here. It arises, you see, because this tremendous technological power has been evolved in a culture which inherits a sense of personality which is frankly a hallucination. And we get this sense of personality from a long, long tradition of Jewish and Christian and Greek ideas which have caused man to feel that the universe of nature - the physical world, in other words - is not himself. You may think that that is a very odd thing to say, because one always assumes that oneself is ones own body, or at least something inside ones body, like a soul. And that naturally, everything outside is not oneself. But this is, as Ive said many, many times, a hallucination. Lets think, here we are in the middle of New York City. And you know what happens when New York City goes wrong. When theres a subway strike, or when the power fails, or when the sewers back up, your life is in danger. Because you are not only constituted by the bloodstream of your veins and the communications network of your nervous system. An extension of your bloodstream, and of your alimentary canal, and of your nervous system, is all the communication systems of this city. In other words, you know well every night streams of trucks pour into this city, carrying food. I understand there is even a kind of big drain pipe which brings milk in. You consume three million pounds of fish a week. You then also have to have the exit end of this. The sewers are very complicated. The water system and all its pipes, the telephone systems, the electric light systems, the air conditioning things, the traffic streams. All these things going on are essential extensions of your own inner tubing. And therefore, you have to be aware, more and more, that the city is an extended body for every person living in it. And not only of course the city, because the city depends on untold acres of fields where farm products are grown, cattle are raised, on lakes and underground water sources; on the constitution of the atmosphere, and finally on the location of the Earth on this propitious spot rather close to the sun, where we have our basic heating system working. And all that is not a world into which you arrived, from somewhere else altogether. It is a complex system of relationships, out of which you grew in exactly the same way that fruit grows on a tree, or a flower on a stem. Just as these blossoms here are symptomatic of the plant, and you identify the plant by looking at the blossoms - here are these little oranges, you see - we know that this is an orange tree. Now in exactly that way, you are all growing in this world, and so we know that this world is a humaningsystem - and therefore it has a certain kind of innate intelligence, just as this tree, with its roots, has the innate intelligence which comes out in these oranges. So the cosmos in which we live is a network of communications. You dont need to think of it in an authoritarian pattern, namely there is God the father, who makes it all work, because that doesnt really answer anything. Thats just applying to the world an explanation derived from the political systems of the ancient Near East. You realize that? The great political systems of the Egyptians and the Chaldeans, where there was an enormous father figure in charge of everything, became the model for the idea of monotheism. And these great kings, like Hammurabi and Amenhotep IV, laid down legal systems so man thought of a prince, a king of kings, a lord of lords, in the words of the Book of Common Prayer. Its a political idea. And I often wonder how citizens of a republic, who have to curse and swear that they think that this is the best form of government, can put up with a monarchial conception of nature. Very funny. You know, a republic, and it says In God We Trust,and most people by God mean a king of the universe. Very strange. But you dont have to think that way in order to have the faith that the universe is something other than mere stupid, blind energy. What we are coming to see is that the total universe, consisting of all its galaxies, and not only this galaxy, is a living organism. How will we define that? What do we mean by a living organism? I mean a system of intercommunication of extreme complexity. Just like you are. You try to define what you are, and you go into it, you suddenly discover that as you take off the skin and look underneath, that we are an enormously complex system of tubes and fibers, beautifully patterned. When we look at it with a microscope, we say Oh my, look at that. Isnt that gorgeous?Have you seen those models of cells that the Upjohn Company has made? Theyre exquisite. And incidentally, you should all, if youve never done so, go to the Charles Darwin Hall in the New York Museum of Natural History and see the glass models of the tiniest microorganisms, called radiolaria. They are also such things as are running around in you,  and they are incomparable jewelry. Now I suppose if we looked at ourselves from that microscopic point of view, all these funny creatures that are running around us that dont look like people, would if you got used to them seem like people. And they would be having their problems. Theyve got all sorts of fights going on, and collaborations and conspiracies and so on. But if they werent doing that, we wouldnt be healthy. If the various corpuscles and cells in our blood stream werent fighting each other, we would drop dead. And thats a sobering thought, that war at one level of being can bring peace and health at another.   So we are, inside us, each indivudial body, an enormous ecological system. And what we have to recognize is that that interconnected system which constitutes the beauty of a human organism, that sort of interconnection is going on outside us. Do you remember in early science fiction that was published in the 1920s, by people like Olaf Stapleton and some of the early writers? They pictured the men of the future as having huge heads to contain very big brains. It was expected, in other words, that the future evolution of mankind would be an evolution of the mind and the brain, and so bigger brains. But what has happened instead of that is that instead of evolving bigness of brain, we are evolving an electronic network in which our brains are very swiftly being plugged into computer systems. Now some very awkward things about this are arising, and weve got to watch out for it, because what has increasingly happened is this: nobody is having any private life left. The invasion of ordinary privacy by the telephone, by your watching television, which is after all looking at somebody elses life going on, by people watching you - all the people with bugging systems and snoopers, and credit agents, and everybody knows everything about you. Even in California, all the houses are built with picture windows looking at other picture windows, and if you draw the curtains, everyone thinks youre snooty. Like if you build a fence in most Midwestern communities, they think Who the hell do you think you are, building a fence to keep everybody else out? See, youre not democratic.But the reason for all this is, imagine the situation when all the original neurons became linked in with the central nervous system. They said, Well, were losing our privacy.So its a very serious question as to how were going to be linked in with other people. I feel - it may be old fashioned of me - but I feel very strongly that privacy should be maintained as much as possible. But the reason being that human beings, in my experience, are a combination of two worlds - the private world and the public world - such that a person with a very strong and different and unique personality is not an isolated person, but a person extremely aware of his identity with the rest of the universe. Whereas people with nondescript, mass-produced personalities tend to be unaware of this. They tend to be the kind of person who is taken in by the system. So what I think we could aim for in the way of human civilization and culture would be a system in which we are all highly aware of our existing interconnection and unity with the whole domain of nature, and therefore do not have to go to all sorts of wild extremes to find that union. In other words, look at the number of people we know who are terrified of silence, and who have to have something going all the time, some noise streaming into their ears. Theyre doing that because of their intense sense of loneliness. And so when they feel silent, they feel lonely and they want to escape from it. Or people who just want to get together. As we say, they want to escape from themselves. More people spend more time running away from themselves. Isnt that wretched? What a definition. What an experience of self if its something youve always got to be running away from and forgetting. Say you read a mystery story. Why? So you forget yourself. You join a religion. Why? To forget yourself. You get absorbed in a political movement. Why? To forget yourself. Well it must be a pretty miserable kind of self if you have to forget it like that. Now for a person who doesnt have an isolated sense of self, he has no need to run away from it, because he knows.   Lets take hermits. People today think being a hermit is a very unhealthy thing to do. Very antisocial, doesnt contribute anything to everybody else - because everybody else is busy contributing like blazes, and a few people have to run off and get out of the way. But Ill tell you what hermits realize. If you go off into a far, far forest and get very quiet, youll come to understand that youre connected with everything. That every little insect that comes buzzing around you is a messenger, and that little insect is connected with human beings everywhere else. You can hear. You become incredibly sensitive in your ears and you hear far-off sounds. And just by the very nature of isolating yourself and becoming quiet, you become intensely aware of your relationship with everything else thats going on. So if you really want to find out how related you really are, try a little solitude off somewhere, and let it begin to tell you how everything is interdependant in the form of what the Japanese buddhists call jijimugi(?). Jimeans a thing event,so it means between thing event and thing event, there is no block.Every thing in the world, every event, is like a dewdrop on a multidimentional spiders web, and every dewdrop contains the reflection of all the other dewdrops. But you see, the hermit finds this out through his solitide, and so also human beings can aquire a certain solitude, even in the middle of New York City. Its rather easier, as a matter of fact, to find solitude in New York City than it is in Des Moines, Iowa. But the point is that a human represents a certain kind of development, wherein a maximal sense of his oneness with the whole universe goes hand in hand with the maximum development of his personality as somebody unique and different. Whereas the people who are of course trying to develop their personality directly and taking a Dale Carnegie course on how to win friends and influence people, or how to become successful - all those people come out as if they came from the same cookie cutter. They dont have any personality. Now then, it therefore becomes the great enterprise of our time from this point of view so this technology shall not go awry, and that it shall not be a war with the cosmos, that we aquire a new sense of identity. It isnt just a theoretical thing that we know about, as ecologists, for example, know about the identity of the organism with its environment, but becomes something that we actually experience. And I feel that this is not at all beyond the bounds of possibility for an enormous number of people. For a simple reason. Let me draw a historical analogy. Several hundred years ago, it seemed absolutely incomprehensible for most people that the world could be round, or that the planets and stars should be up in the sky unsupported, or even that the Earth itself should be floating freely in space. The Earth is falling through space, but it seems stable, and therefore it was supposed in ancient mythologies that the Earth rested on a giant turtle. Nobody asked too carefully what the turtle rested on, but just so that there was some sense of solidity under things. So in the same way that the stars were supposed to be suspended in crystal spheres, and just as people know that the Earth is flat because you can look at it and see that it is, so people looked into the sky and they could see the crystal spheres. Of course you could see the crystal spheres: you could see right through them. So when the astronomers cast doubts on the existence of crystal spheres, everybody felt threatened, that the stars were going to fall on their heads. Just as when they talked about a round Earth, people felt a danger of if you went around to the other side, youd drop off, or feel funny and upside-down, a rush of brains to the head, and all sorts of uncomfortable feelings. But then since then, we have got quite used to the idea that the stars float freely in space in gravitational fields, that you can go around the Earth without falling off, and now everybody realizes this and feels comfortable with it. Likewise, in our day when Einstein propounded the theories of relativity, people said they couldnt understand it. It used to be something at a cocktail party to be introduced to somebody who understands Einstein. Now every young person understands Einstein and knows what its about. Youve got even one year of college, you know what relativity is. And you know it not only in an intellectual way, you know this as a feeling, just as you have a feeling of the roundness of the world, especially if you travel a lot on jet planes. So I feel that in just that way, within I dont know how many years, but in not too long a time, its going to become basic common sense that you are not some alien being who confronts an external world that is not you, but that almost every intelligent person will have the feeling of being an activity of the entire universe. You see, the point is that an enormous number of things are going on inside us of which we are not conscious. We make a very, very arbitrary distinction between what we do voluntarity and what we do involuntarity, and we define all those things which we do involunarily as things which happento us, rather than things that we do. In other words, we dont assume any responsibility for the fact that our heart beats, or that our bones have such and such a shape. You can say to a beautiful girl, Gee, youre gorgeous,and shed say How like a man, all you think about is bodies. My body was given to me by my parents, and Im not responsible for it, and Id like to be admired for my self and not for my chassis.And so Id tell her You poor little chauffeur. Youve disowned your own being and identified yourself not being associated with your own body.I agree that if she had a terrible body with a lousy figure, she might want to feel that way, but if she is a fine-looking human being, she should get with it and not disown herself. But this happens again and again. So you see, if you become aware of the fact that you are all of your own body, and that the beating of your heart is not just something that happens to you, but something youre doing, then you become aware also in the same moment and at the same time that youre not only beating your heart, but that you are shining the sun. Why? Because the process of your bodily existence and its rhythms is a process, an energy system which is continuous with the shining of the sun, just like the East River, here, is a continuous energy system, and all the waves in it are activities of the whole East River, and thats continuous with the Atlantic Ocean, and thats all one energy system and finally the Atlantic ocean gets around to being the Pacific Ocean and the Indian Ocean, etc., and so all the waters of the Earth are a continuous energy system. It isnt just that the East River is part of it. You cant draw any line and say Look, this is where the East River ends and the rest of it begins,as if you can in the parts of an automobile, where you can say This is definitely part of the generator, here, and over here is a spark plug.Theres not that kind of isolation between the elements of nature. So your body knows that its energy system is one with and continuous with the whole energy system, and that if its in any sense true to say that I am my body, and that I beat my heart, and that I think by growing a brain, where do you draw the line between what you think and the power to think? Do you think with your brain in the same way that you carve wood with a knife? Yknow, its an instrument that you pick up and use. I dont think our bodies are just instrumental in that way. Theyre something we are doing, only we dont think about it, in the sense that we dont have to consider when we get up in the morning as an act of voluntary behavior how to connect all of the switches in our brain to get us ready for the day; they come on automatically. But this automatic or, I would rather call it, spontaneous functioning of the brain is what is called in Japanese shizen(?), that is to say, the spontenaity of nature. It does all this, and what we perform consciously is simply a small fragment of our total activity, of which we happen to be aware in a special way. We are far more than that. And it isnt only, say, that the sun is light because we have eyes and optical nerves which translate the energy of the sun into an experience called light.It is also that that very central fire of the sun is something that you are doing just as much as you are generating temperature in your body. In other words, lets suppose that those cosmologists and astronomers are right who believe that this universe started out with an original big bang, which flung all those galaxies out into space. Well, you know what that would be like. Itd be like taking a bottle of ink and flinging it hard at a white wall, and it makes a great splash. And you know how the nature of a splash is--in the middle of it, its dense, and as it gets to the outside of the splash, theres all kinds of curlicues. But its a continuous energy system. In other words, the bang in the beginning cannot really be separated from the little curlicues at the end. So, supposing there was an original cosmic explosion which went FOOM, we sitting around in this room now are little curlicues on the end of it, you see? We are, actually, every one of us is incredibly ancient. The energy which is now manifested as your body is the same energy which was there in the beginning. If anything at all is old, this hand is as old as anything there is. Incredibly ancient. I mean, the energy keeps changing shapes, doing all sorts of things, but there it all is. Its one continuous SPAT. Now, if you just want to define yourself as a little curlicue on the end of things and say Thats all of me there is,then youve got to be a puppet and say Well, Ive been pushed around by this whole system.Like a juvenile delinquent who knows a little Freud. Well I cant help what Im doing, because it was my mother. She was terribly mixed up, and she didnt bring me up properly, and my father was a mess. He was an alcoholic and he never paid any attention to me. So Im a juvenile delinquent.So the social worker says Yes, Im afraid thats so,and eventually some journalist gets ahold of it and says We should punish the parents instead of the kids.So they go around to the parents and the mother says Yes, I admit Im a mess,and the father says Of course Im an alcoholic, but it was OUR parents who brought us up wrong, and we had all that trouble.Well, they cant find them because theyre dead. And so you can go passing the buck way back, and you get to some characters called Adam and Eve. And when THEY were told they were responsible, they passed it again to a snake. And when that snake was asked about it, he passed the buck back to God, and God said I disown you, because I dont let my right hand know what my left hand doeth.And you know who the left hand of God is. The right hand is Jesus Christ, the left is the Devil. Only it mustnt be admitted. Not on your life. But thats the whole thing, you see, in a nutshell. That once you define yourelf as the puppet, you say Im just poor little me, and I got mixed up in this world. I didnt ask to be born. My father and mother gave me a body which is a system of tubes into which I got somehow mixed up, and its a maze and a tunnel and I dont understand a way around it. It needs all these engineers and doctors and so on to fix it, educate it, tell it how to keep going, and Im mixed up in it. Poor little me.Well this is nonsense! You arent mixed up in it, its you, and everybodys being a blushing  violet and saying Im not responsible for this universe, I merely came into it.And the whole function of every great guru is to kid you out of that, and look at you and say Dont give me that line of bull.But you have to be tactful; you have to be effective. You cant just tell people this. You cant talk people out of an illusion. Its a curious thing. Theres a whole debate going on now, as you all know, about whether God exists, and theyre going to do a cover story on God in Timemagazine, and they sent a reporter around to me - they sent reporters around to all sorts of prominent theologans and philosophers. I said I have a photograph of God which you must put on the cover.Its a gorgeous photograph of a Mexican statue made by Dick Borst(?). Beautiful God-the-father with a crown like the Pope. Only they said they were going to use something by Tintoretto. This photograph is a lovely thing. You know, a real genuine Mexican Indian thing. Simple people think this is what God looks like; very handsome man. Anyway, theyre going to do a cover story on God because the theologans are now arguing about a new kind of Christianity which says theres no God and Jesus Christ is his only son. But what these people want to do is they desperately want to keep the church in Christianity because it pays off, thats the ministers job, and although they feel very embarrassed about God, what theyre doing is they want the Bible and Jesus to sort of keep this authority going. How you can do that, I dont know. But at any rate, the point is that God is what nobody admits to being, and everybody really is. You dont look out there for God, something in the sky, you look in you. In other words, underneath the surface of the consciousness that you have and the individual role that you play and are identifying yourself with, you are the works. Just as you ARE beating your heart, in the same way youre shining the sun, and youre responsible. But in our culture, you maynt admit this, because if you come on that youre God, theyll put you in the nuthouse. Because our idea of God is based on Near Eastern politics, and so if youre God, then youre the ruler, the governor - Oh Lord our governor!And so if youre the governor, you know all the answers if thats what you claim to be. So when anybody in our culture says Im God,we say Well, well, why dont you turn this shoe into a rabbit and show me that youre God.But of course in Oriental cultures, they dont think of God as an autocrat. God is the fundamental energy of the world which performs all this world without having to think about it. Just in the same way that you open and close your hand without being able to say in words how you do it. You do it. You say I can open and close my hand.But how? You dont know. That only means, though, that you dont know in words. You do know in fact, because you do it. So in the same way, you know how to beat your heart, because you do it, but you cant explain it in words. You know how to shine the sun, because you do it, but you cant explain it in words, unless youre a very fancy physicist, and hes just finding out - what a physicist is doing is translating what hes been doing all along into a code called mathematics. Then he says he knows how its done. He means he can put it into the code - and thats what the academic world is. Its translating what happened into certain codes called words, numbers, algorhythms, etc., and that helps us repair things when they go wrong. So, the discovery of our inseparability from everything else is something that I dont think will have to come by the primitive methods of difficult yoga meditations, or even through the use of psychedelic chemicals. I think its something thats within the reach of very many peoples simple comprehension. Once you get the point. Just in the same way you can understand that the world is round and you experience it as such. You could call this a kind of guinana(?) yoga, in Hindu terms. But I dont think its going to be necessary for our culture to get this point by staring at its navel, or by spending hours practicing Za-Zen, not that Ive got anything against it, because after all, to sit still can be an extraordinarily pleasant thing to do, and its important for us to have more quiet. But I think this is essentially a matter of intuitive comprehension that will dawn upon us and suddenly hit us all in a heap, and you suddenly see that this is totally common sense, and that your present feeling of how you are is a hoax. You know how Henry Emerson Foster wrote a book called How to be a Real Person? Translated into its original terms, that means How to be a Genuine Fake.Because the person is the mask, the personaworn by actors in Greco-Roman drama. They put a mask on their face which had a megaphone-shaped mouth which projected the sound in an open- air theater. So the dramatis personaat the beginning of a play is the list of masks, and the word person,which means mask,has come to mean the real you. How to be a Real Person.Imagine. But I think well get over it, and discover the thing that we simply dont let our children in on, that we dont let ourselves in on. Let me emphasize this point again. It is not at the moment common sense, not plausible, because of our condition, but we can very simply come to see that YOU are not some kind of accident that pops up for a while and then vanishes - but that deep inwards, you are what there is and all that there is, which is eternal, and that which there is no whicher. Thats you. Now, you dont have to remember that all the time, as you dont have to remember how to beat your heart. You could die and forget everything you ever knew in this lifetime, because its not necessary to remember it. Youre going to pop up as somebody else later on, just as you did before, without knowing who you were. Its as simple as that. You were born once, you can get born again. If there was a cosmic explosion once that blew everything into existence and is going to fizzle out, if it happened once, it can happen again, and it goes on.. Its a kind of undulating system of vibrations. Everythings a system of vibrations. Everything is on/off. Now you see it, now you dont. Light itself is, but its happening so fast that the retina doesnt register it. Everything in the sun is like an arc-lamp, only its a very fast one. It goes on-off. Sound does; and the reason you cant put your finger through the floor is the same reason you cant, without serious problems, push it through an electric fan. The floor is going so fast. Even faster than a fan. The fan is going slow enough to cut your finger if you put it into it. But the floor is going so fast, you cant even get in. But thats the only reason. Its coming into existence and going out of existence at a terrific  clip. So everything is on/off. So is our life. You can die, say Well, I dont know where Im going, I dont know anything.Just like in the same way you dont know whats going on inside your nervous system. How the nervous system links together, or anything like that. You dont need to know, and if you had to find it all out, youd get so confused with all the information that you wouldnt be able to operate. Itd be just too much to think about with a single-pointed ordinary attention consciousness, which is a scanning system, like radar. You dont need to know how it all works in order to work it out. Thats the real meaning of omnipotence. That reminds me of a funny-- Gary Schneider is a great friend of mine. Hes a poet from the West Coast, and hes a very good Zen student. Hes studying under Oda-Roshi. And he suggested one day that we found a null and void title in Gary and Trust Company, with its slogan Register your absence with us.And what you do is, you give your fortune to us, and we guarantee to transport it to you in the next life. Anyway. This situation, I was suggesting, is one that can be  overcome reasonably simply, if you can just get the idea straight. A lot of people say, you know, I understand what you say intellectually, but thats not enough. I dont really understand it.But I often think that when people say that, they dont fully understand it intellectually. If you can get something quite clear, really clear in your head, I dont think that our mind is compartmentalized so that the intellects over here, and the feelings are over here, and the intuition is over there, and the sensations are over there. I dont think Jung meant that when he made that classification. I think every faculty of the mind is continuous with all the others. And so what youre saying when you say I understand it intellectually, but I dont get it intuitively,or I dont feel it in my bones,is that you understand it in the sense of being able to repeat a form of words. Now its true that theres lots of debates and problems that are purely verbal. A great deal of what goes on as theological or philosophical discussion is absolutely nothing except a war of words. A logical positivist, for example, can show conclusively that all metaphysical statements are meaningless. But so what? Thats just talk. People have, on the other hand, experienced, say, mystical states, and these experiences are quite as real as the experience of swimming in water, or lying in the sun, or eating a steak, or dying. And you cant talk them away. Theyre THERE, in a very concrete sense. But there is a very close connection between your conceptual understanding of the world and how you actually see the world. In other words, lets take for example this problem: there are people who dont have number systems going beyond three. They count One, two, three, many.So anything above three is a heap, or many. Now those people cannot know that a square table has four corners. It has many corners. But once youre able to count beyond four, you can extend your counting system indefinitely. You have a different feeling about nature. Its not only you know more, but you feel more. You feel more clearly. So my point is simply that the intellect is not something cut off from every other kind of experience, existing in a kind of abstract vacuum which has nothing to do with anything else. The intellect is part and parcel of the whole fabric of life. It goes along with your fingers; it goes along with being able to touch. After all, what an intellectual thing in a way the human hand is. It can do things that other hands cant do. No other mammal can have thumb-finger contact. The monkey doesnt achieve it. So the hand is intellectual. So, as a matter of fact, a plant is intellectual. This thing is a gorgeous pattern. If you look into it and realize how this is designed to absorb light and moisture and so on, and to expose itself in different ways and to propogate its species, that its in alliance with bees and other insects, so that the bees and the plants, since they go together and are found together, theyre all one continuous form of life. This doesnt exist except in a world where bees are floating around. I mean, you can bring it into an apartment, but you cant expect it to propogate beyond that point. Its decorative here. But in its natural habitat, this goes along with being bees, and bees go with their being something else. So this form that you see here is inseparable from all kinds of other forms which must exist if this is to exist. And the bees have language, if youve read Van Fritches(?) book about bees and their marvelous intelligence. But you see that the intelligence of the plant is the same as the pattern of the plant. You shouldnt think that I would say the plant is the result of intelligence. The shape of it is the same as its intelligence. The shape of your brain, the shape of your face, the whole structure of the culture you live in, the human interrelationships that go on-- its that pattern which is intelligence. Now what Im trying to talk about is a deeper understanding of the pattern in which we live, and if you understand that, it suddenly hits you so that you feel, right in your guts, this new kind of existence that is NOT yourself alone facing an alien world, but yourself as an expression of the world in the same way as the wave is the expression of the ocean. Now then, the most important shift one has to make in intelligence and understanding this is to be able to think in a polar way. We sometimes say of things that we want to describe as being opposed to each other as being in conflict, that they are the poles apart.People who belong to different schools of thought; people who belong to nations in opposition with each other; people who are in flat, outright conflict, we say they are the poles apart. But thats a very funny phrase. Because things that are the poles apart happen to be very deeply connected. The North and the South Pole are the poles of one Earth. So try to imagine a situation in which there is an encounter between opposites, which have no connection with each other at all. Where will they come from? How will they meet each other? You think from the opposite ends of space? But what is space? For space to have opposite ends, there has to be a continuum between the ends. And so to think in a polar way is to realize the intimate connection between processes or events or things, which language describes as if they were unconnected and opposed. Lets take, first of all, two very fundamental poles. Well call them respectively solidand space,if you want existence and non-existence, because we tend to treat space as something that is not there. Thats simply because we dont see it; we ignore it. We treat it as if it had no effective function whatsoever, and thus when our astronomers begin to talk about curved space, expanding space, properties of space, and so on, we think What are they talking about? How can space have a shape? How can there be a structure in space, because space is nothing.But it isnt so. You see, this is something we completely ignore. Why? Because we have specialized in a form of attention to the world which concentrates on certain features as important. We call this conscious attention, and therefore it ignores or screens out everything which doesnt fit into its particular scheme. And one of the things that doesnt fit into our scheme is space. So we come into a room like this and notice all the people in the room, and the furniture, and the flowers and the ornaments, and think that everything else just isnt there. I mean, what about this interval that is between me sitting here and the inner circle of people who are arranged around the floor? What a mess we would be in if there wasnt that interval. You know, I would be blowing down your throat to talk to you. Now intervals of this spacial kind are tremendously important. Let me demonstrate this to you in a musical way. When you listen to a melody, what is the difference between hearing that melody and hearing a series of noises? The answer is that you heard the intervals. You heard the musical spaces between the series of tones. If you didnt hear that, you heard no melody, and you would be whats called tone-deaf. But what you actually hear is the steps between the levels of sound--the levels of vibration--that constitute the different tones. Now those werent stated, they were tacit. Only the tones were stated, but you heard the interval. So it made all the difference whether you heard the interval or not. So in exactly the same way, the intervals between us, seated around here, constitute many important things. They constitute the diginity of us all. They constitute the fact my face isnt all mushed up in your face, and that we therefore have individual faces, and that need spaces around us. In a country like Japan, space is the most valuable commodity, because its a small island thats heavily overpopulated. So an apartment in Japan costs you a lot of money; in Hong Kong, its sky- high. But they have mastered the control of space in a fantastic way. And one of the ways they control space is through politeness. You can live with other people so that you live in a house where youre so close together that you can hear every belly rumble of your neighbor, and you know exactly whats going on. But you learn to hear without listening, and to see without looking. Theres a courtesy, you see, a respect for privacy which puts an interval between one individual and another. And its by reason of that interval that you are defined as you and Im defined as I. So you see the various kinds of space, various kinds of intervals? The pauses, when a person plays the drum--its those intervals--otherwise it would be of no interest. Its the intervals that make the thing valuable. The space, then, is as real as the solid. This is the principle of polarity. Space and solid, in other words, which are formally opposed things. And you think, Well, where there is a solid, there is something, and where there is space, there is nothing.They are actually as mutually supportive as back and front. They go together. Nobody ever found a space without a solid, and nobody ever found a solid without a space. But weve been trained to fix our attention on the solid and disregard the space. Well then obviously you havent been given the news, you havent been let in on what the secret of life is. It is that the space is as important as the solid. And if you see that, then you have the clue.   Now in the same way exactly, all other kinds of supposedly opposed entities and forces imply and involve each other. And this is the key to getting a different kind of consciousness of oneself, because you wouldnt know who you are unless you knew what you have defined as other than yourself. Self and other define each other mutually. Lets consider this first of all in a kind of a funny social way. In every town in the United States, there are a group of people who consider themselves to be the nicepeople. They live on the right side of the tracks. Where I live in Sausalito, California, they live up on the hill, and down on the waterfront, there live all kinds of beatniks and bums, and we live in boats and shacks of all kinds. Some of these shacks are elegant inside, but thats a secret. We call the boat I live on the Oyster, because you know how an oysters shell on the outside is very rough and crude, but theres pearls on the inside. But anyway, the people up on the hill say--what do they talk about? When they get together for cocktails or dinner or whatever and they have their social occasions, whats the topic of conversation? Its how the people are awful down below, and theyre encroaching and the town is going to the dogs, and etcetera, etcetera, etcetera. By this means, they preserve their collective ego. Meanwhile, the people down below, what do they talk about at their parties? They talk about the squares up on the hill who are engaged in business, which is ridiculous because its nothing but a rat-race, and they buy Cadillacs and other phony objects, and they deride them, but in the same way, those beatniks are enhancing THEIR collective ego, and they dont realize that they need each other. That the symbiosis between the nice people and the nasty people, between the ingroup and the outgroup, is as much a symbiosis as between the bees and the flowers. Because you wouldnt know who you were, unless there was an outsider. In exactly the same way, politically speaking, our economy is presently dependant upon the cold war, which mustnt be allowed to become hot. Because if there werent an enemy, defined as communism,  nobody would be disturbed, nobody would be worried, therefore they wouldnt put all this energy and money and taxes into a certain kind of productivity. Likewise on the other side, if those people in China and Russia couldnt be worried about and afraid of the dirty capitalists, they wouldnt have any means of stirring up their people to do something. Everybody would presumably just loaf around. So because you define your position in opposition to another position, then you know who you are courtesy of the outsider, and so you can say to the outsider--if this suddenly strikes you, you start laughing, because you realize that youre indebted to the outsider, whom you defined as awful, because you know where he is, you know where you are. Well now its the same thing in philosophy and religion. There are all sorts of schools of thought, and they disagree with each other, they debate with each other, but so far as Im concerned, I wouldnt know what I thought unless there were people who had different opinions than mine. Therefore, instead of saying to those people, You ought to agree with me,Id say to them, Thank you so much for disagreeing, because now I know where I am.I wouldnt know otherwise. In other words, the in goes with the out; the solid with the space. Its a very funny thing. Take any highly organized system of life. Take the way a garden exists. Its full of, in a sense, competitive species. Snails and thrushes and various insects that are supposed to be at war with each other. And because their fights keep going on, the life of the garden as a whole is maintained. And so I cant say All snails in this garden should be abolished, so that the lettuces should thrive,because if there arent some snails around there, the birds wont come around, because they like the snails. And the birds do all sorts of things for my garden, not to mention supplying it with manure and all kinds of things. So I need them around. So the price of having birds is snails that eat your lettuces. And so on. I mean, this is merely an instance, an example of this. The funny thing is, though, that when you realize this, and you suddenly see for the first time that you and your point of view, and everything that you stand for and believe in--and you think Boy, Im going to stand for that and Im going to fight for that!--that it depends on its opposite. When you get that, it starts giving you the giggles, and you begin to laugh at yourself, and this is one of the most amazing forces in life, the creative force is human. Because when you are in a state of anxiety, and you are afraid that black may win over white, that darkness may conquer light, that non-being  may conquer being, you havent seen this point. When it strikes you that the two go together, the trembling emotional feeling which we call anxiety is given another value, and its called laughter. Now lets take the phenomenon of an electric bell. When you turn on an electric bell, you turn on a system in which yesimplies no.That is to say, heres the bell, and beneath it, theres an electromagnet, and that magnet, when its switched on, magnetizes an armature, which comes and hits the bell. But the moment it does that, it turns off the current, so that the magnet releases it, and because the armature has a spring on it, it goes back. That turns the current on. So it comes back; that turns the current off. So yesequals no; noequals yes.And so the bell vibrates, which is what you want it to do. Now, how do you interpret your own vibrating, your alternation between yesand no? You can interpret this as an awful thing of doubt, and then you say you were anxious. But if you see that the one implies the other, then it becomes ha ha ha ha ha.It becomes a laugh. So the transformation of anxiety into laughter comes about through realizing the polarity of yesand no,of  to beand not to be.   But the important thing for our purposes is the polarity between the self and the other. Lets consider for example, when you hate, you love yourself. I love me.Lets be very egotistic and VERY selfish indeed. What do you love when you love yourself? Think about it. Say you were going to live a completely disillusioned,  self-interested life, and other people can go hang. Now consider, what is it that youre interested in? Well,you say for example, I like eating.Okay. Do you eat yourself? No. I like eating fish, oysters, radishes, mushrooms.All these are things that are formally speaking not me, yet these are what I say I like. Well, could you say What I really like about them is the state they put ME in when they impinge on me? In other words, when I put the mushroom sauce in my mouth, that does something to my mouth and my body, and its THAT that I like, rather than the mushrooms as such. Well that isnt the truth. If thats all, you cant cook properly. I can tell instantly when I taste something thats been cooked, what state of mind the cook was in.    Now let me tell you a secret. You cannot possibly be a good cook unless you like to pick up an onion in your hands, look it over, and say Oh, isnt that lovely?Or feel an egg. I think an egg is one of the most beautiful shapes on Earth, and you take it up, and although its an opaque shell, it has a kind of subtle, luminous transparency to it. Especially when you see the variations between white eggs and brown eggs, and you look at those things and you just love them. Now unless you have that feeling, you cant cook. You may follow recipes, you may have had a training course, you may have had everything. But everything youre going to cook, unless you have that feeling, is going to taste as though its been washed in detergent, and you can tell. It may be that they used no fancy sauces, they roasted a piece of meat. Lets take the Chinese way of cooking a chicken. You take a chicken, and you put in boiling water for ten minutes, with salt and a little sherry. You turn it off, and you leave it there for a half an hour. Then you take it out and chill it, and that can be the most succulent chicken imaginable.    But somehow it doesnt quite come off if this was just a formula. Same way when you strike a note on the piano, it isnt simply a matter of so much pressure which could be measured on some sort of mechanical instrument, because if that was so, all wed have to do is get those player pianos which hit the notes regularly in accordance with the formula, and they all sound terrible. Because theres a thing in touching thats called follow-through. When you hit a golf ball, its not enough to hit the ball with a certain volume, you have to have a swing that goes beyond that, and so in the same way with striking notes, there has to be a thing called follow-through, that you go beyond the actual hitting of the note, and that is a thing thats hard to measure, but is very important and makes all the difference.    So then, the relationship of self to other is the complete realization that loving yourself is impossible without loving everything defined as other than yourself. In fact, the more you try to think about what your self is, the more you discover that you can only think about yourself in terms of things that you thought were other than yourself. If you search for yourself, this is one of the great koan problems in Zen, produce you, find out who you are. When, for example, Shri Ramana Maharshi, that great Hindu sage of modern times--people used to come to him and say Who was I in my previous incarnation?You know, that sort of stupid question. He would say Who wants to know?Who are you? Find out who you are. And you can search for you endlessly, and never find out. Never. Everything that you get a kind of sensation of as being yourself will, upon examination, turn out to be something else. Something other.    And now lets work on the other direction. Go exactly the opposite way. What do you mean by something other? Lets find something other than me, and search for that. Well,I say, all right. I can touch the ground here.This is something other than me, and yet, I realize that my sensation of this soft carpet with something firm underneath it is a state of my nerve endings in my hand and in my muscles, which report to me that this is a softly covered hardness, and that everything I feel about this carpet and the floor is a condition of my brain. In other words, when I feel this so-called external thing, I feel it only as it is as it were translated into states of my own body. All of you I see with your various shapes and colors, when I look out here, I am actually having an experience of how it feels inside my head. Thats the place where I know you, and you know me, in your heads. So that I really do not have any sensations of anything other than myself, because whatever I do know, I have to translate it into a state of my own body in order to know it at all.    But do you see now what I have done? I carried in one direction the argument, where do I find my self? And it all turned out to be something other. Then I followed the question, how do I find something other, and it all turned out to be me. The same thing happens, for example, when you get into the old debates about fate and free will. When you discover that everything that you do is completely determinate. Then you suddenly have to wake up to the fact that the only real you is whatever it is thats determining what you do. I mean, if you say All that I do here and now is a result of the past. There have been processes in the past, going back and back and back, and my sitting here in this room and talking to you is simply the necessary effect of all that ever happened before.Do you know what thats saying? Its saying that here in your presence talking to you is everything that ever happened before. Thats me. Wowee, and so of course with you being here, if you want to figure it that way, because all this problem about causality is completely phony.    Its all based on this--that in order to talk about the world and think about it, we had to chop it up into bits, and we called those bits things and events. In the same way, if you want to eat chicken, you cant swallow a whole chicken unless youve got a huge mouth. So you cut it up into pieces, or you get a cut-up fryer from the store, but you dont get a cut-up fryer from an egg. Chicken comes whole out of the egg. So in the same way, the universe of nature doesnt come in bits or bites. It comes all in one piece. But to digest it, to absorb it into your mind, youve got to cut it into bits and take it in, as we say, one thing at a time. But that chopping of the world into these separate bits is like chopping up the chicken or carving the slices off the beef, or taking water out, cupful by cupful. You can handle it that way, but thats not the way it is.    So you have to see that the whole notion of there being particular, separate events, and particular, separate things, is nothing more than a calculus. A calculus. Calculus means pebbles.Pebbles used for counting. So when we measure curves, we pretend as if they were a series of points, and the position of these points can be expressed in an arithmatical way, say by tracing a curve across a piece of finely calibrated graph paper. Thats the basis of the calculus. So that a curve swings so many points across, so many down, etc., and so you feel you have control of the curve that way, you measure it, you know where it really goes. But where it really goes, you have set up this reallyin terms of your other criss- cross system, and you said Thats for real.All it means is youve meshed two different systems, one on top of the other, and youre saying What I mean by reality is the systems of measurements that Ive invented. The system of weights and measures. This thing is REALLY,and you feel a great sense of confidence, exactly two pounds.Now simply because youve made the two pounds of apples correspond with the weighing machine, which is a constant. Two pounds of apples, two pounds of grapes, different number of apples, different number of grapes, but you say Thats really two pounds.   But so, in just the same way, we say There are really different people. There are really different events.But actually there arent. Im not saying that if we were to see the world in its truth, all of you different people would disappear, that your outlines would suddenly become vague, and you would turn into a solid lump of gelatinous goo. A lot of people think thats the way mystics see things. Thats not at all what would happen. The thing Im saying is this: we are all different, but we are as interrelated and indispensable to each other as the different organs in our body -  stomach, heart, glands, bones, etc. Now you can argue that the stomach is fundamental--eating is the big thing, and therefore we grew brains as extensions of the stomach to get it more food. So that you say The brain is the servant of the stomach.But you can argue equally that the brain is primary, and it has all these thinking games to play, and it needs a stomach as an appendage to supply it with energy. Or you can argue that the sex organs are primary and they need the brain and the stomach to keep that ecstasy going. But the brain and the stomach can equally argue that they wouldnt find it worthwhile going on unless they had the sex organ appendange to give them solace. The truth of the matter is that nobody comes first. No one pushes the other around. You dont find brains without stomachs and sex organs. They all go together - and this is the fallacy of Freud, in saying that the sexual apparatus are primary. It just goes along with the others.    So you dont have a universe in which a series or a collection of separate events or things are banging each other around like an enormous mass of billiard balls. You have a situation which is quite different from that, where what have hitherto been called causally related events,to say that certain events are causally related is a very clumsy way of saying that these certain specific events which you have isolated as being causally related, were in fact really all parts of the same event.   If you study the writings of the mystics, you will always find things in them that appear to be paradoxes, as in Zen, particularly. Empty-handed I go, yet a spade is in my hand. I walk on foot, and yet Im riding on the back of an ox - and when crossing a bridge, the bridge flows, and the water stays still. Or when Jim drinks, John gets tipsy. Zen is full of paradoxes of this kind. Eckhart is full of sayings like this, The eye with which I see God is the same eye with which God sees me. The love with which I love God is the same love with which God loves me.Things like that.    So this principle is explained in the sutra of the sixth patriarch. You know, the famous platform sutra of Whey-No he gives a long instruction on how to answer peoples questions about Zen. He says If they ask you a question about something sacred, give them an answer in terms of the secular. If they ask about the secular, give them an answer in terms of the sacred.So if somebody says What is buddha?say This saucepan holds about a quart.If they ask you about a saucepan, you say Why is my hand so much like the buddhas hand?   And so thats the secret to understanding funny stories in Zen, that its the same thing that - Its polarity. All these paradoxes are polarity thinking. Because what makes the difference between a person who has this type of cosmic or mystical consciousness - I dont like these words, but we havent got a good word for this state of mind. Well, well have to put our heads together and invent something better. In academic circles, I call it ecological awareness,because mysticism is a dirty word around the academy. So ecological awarenessdoes fairly well, except again, you always have to explain to people what ecology is; they dont know yet. Ecology is the science which deals with the relationships between organisms and their environments. Just as economics, in Greek, ecos,is the home.So economics, ecosnomos,is the law of the home, and ecologosis the logic of the home, and so the ecos,the home of man, is the world. So ecology is mans relationship to the world, or a plants relationship to its environment. All that kind of relationship, the study of the bee and flower bit, is ecology.   The thing that is so characteristic, then, of this new or different kind of consciousness, is that it starts from or has its foundation in awareness of relationship, of  go withness,that the inside of a situation goes with the outside, and although you may think from the point of view of ordinary consciousness, that they work independantly from each other; in this state of consciousness you see that they dont. In other words, its slowly beginning to penetrate our ordinary consciousness. That what any individual does, and we ascribe to him as his behavior and praise him for it or blame him for it, everything that he does goes with what happens outside him. The behavior of the environment, and the behavior of that organism within that environment, is one behavior, and you mustnt think of this deterministically. That is to say, as if the organism were something merely subservient to the environment. Nor must you think the opposite way, that the environment is something that can be pushed around by the organism. When an organism starts looking as if it were pushing its environment around, it simply means that the environment/organism, the total field, is changing itself.    So there is no determinism in this, just as there is no idea of old-fashioned free will. You learn to see that there is simply one behavior pattern working, which we will call the organism-environment,  and if you understand that, you undertand that YOU are  this totality organism-environment, and so you are moving with it in the same way that all the organs of your physical body are moving together. As all the cells of the brain cooperate. You dont have to make them cooperate, you dont have to tell them to; you dont have to arrange a treaty of some kind, they just do so. So when birds fly, you notice particularly birds like sandpipers, when they turn suddenly in the air, they turn as if they were all one bird. Although when they land on the sand, they become individuals, and they run about independantly looking for worms. Then suddenly you shout at them, and they shoot into the air, and theyre all one creature, moving as if it had a single mind. You know that haiku poem: Now, in just the same way with all of us in this room exist totally together here and now, with all our innumerable physical organs, and every single one of our hairs, all present here. Nevertheless, we notice all this in series, and we come to imagine, therefore, that we live in time instead of in eternity, and so I have to resort to funny little tricks, like I was discussing yesterday, to show how the past is influenced by the future, because we screen that possibility out by the way we pay attention to things. We are absolutely befuddled with words, and you see, words follow the same linear pattern, because words are a notation. Conscious observation of the world by the spotlight always is accompanied by a notation. That is to say the notation of language, the notation of written letters, the notation of numbers, the notation of algebraical symbols, any kind of notation you want to think of. Musical notes--they do the same thing. And you notice what you can notate, and that is what is notable, noteworthy, because we observe and become aware consciously only of those things that we consider important. And what do you consider important? Well, that depends on your hobby. For which for most people is survival. But when you get relaxed, when you get into the contemplative state, and you sit quietly--you know, you should try tea ceremony for this; this is a way of noticing everything. I mean, if suddenly realizing that what people consider important is that most of them are absolutely out of their minds. They are rushing around with piercing eyes looking into the future, trying to make livings, and then when they make the living, they dont know what to do with it, because they dont have time to enjoy it. I mean, after all, if youve got a business, and youre fleecing the public by putting out an inferior product and making scads of money doing this, then when youve made your money, all you have to buy is the inferior products of your competitors, and youve cheated yourself, because you didnt know how to live. Im getting ready to do a new television series on the contributions of Asia to the lesiurely life and the good life. Its going to be about things like Chinese and Indian cooking; Japanese bathtubs, how to install one in the American home; how to do Japanese massage; how to make up your wife like a Hindu dancing girl; how to dress, what Asia has to contribute to comfortable clothes; all kinds of things like that. How to be civilized, yes, because were [telling?] the American public that theyre the richest country in the world and they dont know how to enjoy themselves. Really, the things that we are told are enjoyable, arent, really. It will discuss, for example, things like the snow treatment, which is four couples--or four of anybody, for that matter--its where an evening is set aside for one person to serve the other, wait on them hand and foot, and deliver them a glorious evening of dining, dancing, hot tubs, massage, lovemaking, everything, and you really knock yourself out to do something beautiful for another person. But people dont do that sort of thing. I dont know why not, its tremendous fun, for both parties involved. Snow,is slang for heroin, and is used in this case as a joke, that this is the ultimate pleasure. So we say to snowsomeone is to give them an absolutely royal time. But this incapacity for--well, we could call it an incapacity for pleasure, and this tremendous preoccupation with time and with rush and with getting there, is a result of overspecialization in linear consciousness. Now, linear consciousness is indeed remarkable, but it is something in a way aggresive. Just as the sword, the cutting edge, is an aggresive instrument, as distinct from the total skin. With the total skin, you can feel all over, and in this way you embrace life. When you get into a hot tub, it goes all over your skin, and its a type of diffused thing, what Freud called polymorphus erotic feeling, all over. Whereas conscious awareness is like the point of a pencil: it jabs, and it writes down precisely what. And so those people who are all conscious attention are sort of intellectual porcupines. Theyre all prickles into things, and that gives them an essentially hostile attitude toward life, because of course conscious attention is a troubleshooter. Its the radar in the human organism to watch out for changes in the environment, just as the radar of a ship is watching out for icebergs, and an airplanes radar is watching out for thunderclouds. So in the same way, our thing is going around like this, and its serving a very valuable function. But if you identify yourself all entire with that part function, then you define yourself as being in trouble, and looking for trouble, and you become unaware of your generalized relationship with the external world.    So then, you dont see that other things are important, besides those things which are practical.Nobody takes time off to look at these things, and Nan-sen, the Zen master, said most people look at these flowers as if they were in a dream.That is to say, they were not awake, not looking at it at all. And people think, Well, theyre pretty; they decorate the room; they have green leaves, and thats nice.And once you get them to draw what they think it looks like, it doesnt look anything like it. You know, you draw a leaf, you make an outline like this, and you fill it up with green paint. But these arent green. Theyre every color of the rainbow. If you look at any single leaf of this plant, and you look deeply enough, you will see the reflection of every color in the room in it. And you will begin to realize that if you contemplate long enough on the leaf of the flower, that it involves the whole universe.    You should watch for things like this, its fascinating. Dont dismiss refections as things that arent there. When you walk into a room, you can see that not only do the windowpanes, and polished furniture, and peoples spectacles, and peoples eyeballs, not only do they reflect everything going on around you, also things pick up color. What color is the carpet? It depends on the light. You say, Well, its a white carpet.Thats only because the windows arent colored. If the windows were blue, it would be a blue carpet. But,you say, a transparent window is of course a truer and more correct window than a blue one,but is it? Why should it be? Why should so- called white glass be more real somehow than blue glass? Nobody every answered that. So its just that white glass is what we use most of the time, so we say thats more realthan what we would only use occasionally. But then in a dark room, the color of the carpet changes. When its got shadows on it in a certain way, any painter can say thats no longer a white carpet. What color are these shadows? I dont know. Some of them look gold.So then you begin to realize through reflection that in a way, everything is reflection. Thats quite a thought. We all feel that there are substantial things. The feeling of hardness I get when I shove my fist against somthing is exactly like the feeling of light when I meet somthing with my eyes.    The point is that the eyes are so sensitive that they can realize the concreteness of light. The ears are so sensitive that they can realize the concreteness of air vibrations and turn them into sound. The fingers are less sensitive, and they realize concreteness--that is, reality--in terms of touch, in terms of hardness. But all these things are reflections. That is to say-- Well, lets ask the question, is a rainbow real? Well, it fulfills all the catagories of being there, because it fills all the catagories of public observation. It isnt the hallucination of just one observer, because you can stand beside me and see the rainbow, too. But you just try to get ahold of that rainbow, approach it. I remember as a little boy, Id ride my bicycle around chasing rainbow ends, and believing there might be a pot of gold at the end of it. But the irritating thing was, you could never catch up with the rainbow. Well, was it there, or wasnt it? Well, everybody saw it. But you see, it depends on a kind of triangulation between you and the sun and the moisture in the air, and if that triangulation doesnt exist, and of those three functions dont exist, there isnt any rainbow. Just like if I hit a drum, and I pound the hell out of it with no skin on the drum, it wont make any noise. In other words, for the drum to beat, needs both skin and a fist. If theres no skin, the drum doesnt make any noise; if theres no fist, the drum doesnt make any noise.    So in the same way, exactly, the hard floor made of stone is like a rainbow. It is there only if certain conditions of relationship are fulfilled. Now, we like to think, you see, that houses and things go on existing in their natural state when were not around looking at them or feeling them. But what about the rainbow? Supposing that theres nobody to see it; would it be there? Or let me put it in another way. Were supporting the myth that the external world exists without us, but lets ask the question in another way. Supposing I was there, capable of seeing a rainbow, but there wasnt any sun out. It wouldnt be there, would it? Lets put it another way. Suppose the sun was out, and I was there to see it, but there wasnt any moisture in the atmosphere. It wouldnt be there, would it? So equally, it wouldnt be there if there was no one there to see it. It just as much depends on somebody to see it as it depends on the sun and it depends on the moisture.    But we try to pretend, you see, that the external world exists altogether independently of us. Thats the whole myth of the independent observer, of man coming into a world into which he doesnt really belong, and that its all going in there and he has nothing to do with it, but he just arrives in here and sees it as it always was. But thats a joke and people could only feel that way if they felt compeletely alienated and did not feel that the external world was continuous with their own organism. You bet you the external world is so continuous with your own organism: the whole world is human because its humaning.    There was a superstition in the 19th century to think of it some other way. Because, for example, when it was found out that the Earth was not the center of the cosmos, but that we were a small planet in a rather insignificant solar system, way out on the edge of a galaxy that certainly wasnt the biggest galaxy there was in all space, and people began to say, Oh, dear me. Man is nothing. Hes merely a fungus on this little rock that goes around the sun, and nature couldnt care less.And so all the poets of the new 19th century philosophy of science said Man is nothing.But at the same time, man was saying he was the spearhead of evolution, the farthest that life had progressed, and he was going to conquer nature, because hes just a poor little accident, and if hes going to make his way of life successful, hes got to fight all this nonsense around him, all these other creatures that arent even civilized, and beat them into submission so theyll be civilized.    Well thats a big story; thats a fairly tale. You could equally say man is a mighty atom, tiny, way off in some funny corner of the universe--but dont forget, the universe has no corners. Everywhere in it is the middle, or can be regarded as such, just as I pointed out to you that any point on a sphere can be seen as the center of the surface of the sphere. So in the same way, anything in curved space can be seen as the middle of it all. And here in the middle of it all, once again the Earth has become the center of the cosmos. The infinitely mobile central point of all possible orbits. That was a joke phrase invented by Franz Verfeld(?) in his book Star of the Unborn.But it really is. You can regard anywhere as central. So, here in the center is this extraordinary little being whose importance is not in his size--thats no criterion of value--but in his complexity, in his sensitivity, in the fact that these little germs, these tiny, tiny creatures we call people are each one of them essential to the existence of the whole cosmos. Thats the sort of relation we have here between the great and the small, the macrocosm and the microcosm.    But you see, we dont think about it, because of a way-- We are all brought up within social forms which denied us. Little children should be seen and not heard.When children come into this world, we put them down. You get used to that in infancy, and all your life through, you feel vaguely put down by reality. Government gives itself airs and graces, even in a democracy. The police are superbly rude to everybody else, just because they happen to be the instruments of the law. Incidentally, theres a very amusing article in a periodical called the East Village Other,on policemanship, and what to do if youre detained by one of these officers of the law, how to behave. You must be respectful, thats the main point. You see, that attitude, that you are here on probation, on sufferance, that you dont matter, that youre not important to this whole thing at all, and that you could be wiped out any time and no one would miss you, is very, very deeply pushed into us by social institutions. Because were afraid that if we taught people otherwise they would get too big for their boots. Well, of course they might, because they would be reacting against the old way of doing things. If you tell a person whos been put down all his life that he is in fact the lord god, hes liable to go off his rocker.    But the problem is that we have got a certain criterion of what to experience, and what to look at, and what is important, as a result of specialization of conscious attention alone, and with that goes the idea that the most important virtue in a living organism is agression. Were terribly anxious if our kids arent brought up to be aggressive. You know, you get a report about your boy from the school teacher telling you that Johnnys not aggressive enough. Well, you thought he was supposed to be integrated with the group, thats what they were talking about some time ago, and now they say he doesnt show aggression. Because the culture is aggressive; its based, for example, you can-- Look at our taboos. We have no taboo against pictures of people being tortured and murdered, which are very unpleasant, but we do have a taboo against pictures of people making love. Why? We have the feeling, you see, that everything to do with the glowing, flowing, glorious, warm participation of life is slightly sickening. Whereas where life is not participated in, but where theres kind of a sharp contact, why thats real. A lot of people dont really know theyre here unless they hurt. And if you have any doubts in your conscious as to whether youre all right, so long as youre in pain you can be sure you are. Suffering is so good for you, because it builds character, and above all it tells you that youre here. I know people who like going to the dentist, because they get a great sense of reality from going to the dentist.    But, in the history of mankind, there have been all kinds of perfectly viable and successful cultures which didnt buy that story. The famous matriarchal cultures were always different in their attitude. They werent afraid of pleasure. They wouldnt say that ecstacy was enfeebling. This is a system of values based on people for whom the object of existence is survival and conquest,  and they say, Well, that is important,and they cannot understand that survival might not be that important. Survival only seems to you that important when you think that your particular death is curtains. But if you see that the world goes on anyhow, and even supposing we were to blow up this planet tomorrow, completely, itd be a matter of time, but the whole thing would soon be going again. Might not be in this solar system, or even in this galaxy, because simply what happened once can happen again. And it may take billions of years, but whats that in cosmic time? Itll go on. And if people see this, they wont blow it up. What will make us blow the planet up that the competition for survival is our anxiety for the whole thing. Oh, lets blow it up, because we cant bear sitting around wondering when its going to happen. Get it over with.And this is our difficulty.    So if you understand--lets carry this further now--that you are really the cosmos, and that you cant die, in that sense of you, you can disappear as an individual organism, yes, but thats only your surface. The real you cant die, so stop fooling around as if you could. Youll be relaxed and youll be happy, and you wont start this tremendous project to assert your individuality over everybody else, just to tell you that youre really there; thats all they do. I mean, a person who goes out for power, who wants to feel that hes in control of all the things that are happening around him is  simply somebody who is in a state of terror.    I was in a club in Dallas a few days ago, and I met a man whos alleged to be the richest man in the United States, and he looked miserable. But boy, does he have power. And of course, hes spending his life trying to prevent other people having any, especially his competitors. But hes miserable. He looks as if he had ulcers, and just terrible.    So this is a question of learning new values and learning them by letting up on this tremendously frantic kind of consciousness, which jumps from one thing to another and says Whats next?Now if you do this, for example, if you get out of that bind, you can take--I  seem to be facing the carpet, so it forms a natural illustration--you  can take the carpet, and in the ordinary way you would look at that and say Well, its a nice carpet, its all right, but its mighty disorganized.You know, all the hairs in it, and the tufts go this way and that way and so on. But if you see it the way Im looking at it at the moment, its not disorganized at all, because this is not chaos. This is-- I dont have any preconception about it, that it should be this way or it should be that way. This looks to me as beautiful as patterns in foam, or the way bark grows on a tree, or the way leaves scatter themselves across the surface of a pond. You see, we see all those things are beautiful, because the painters copy them and the photographers enjoy photographing them. They never go wrong in their formations. Nor do you. Except from a certain point of view. Yes, I mean when we dont know that we dont go wrong, then we go wrong, because we get in a panic about whats going to happen to us. But if we do know that we dont go wrong, then we dont get in a panic, and we can live harmoniously.    But were afraid, you see, to know that we dont go wrong, because we think that if we do that, we will lose our morals. But the only reason why people lose their morals is that theyre scared. They cant trust life, or they cant trust others. They think that if you die or something like that, it will be terrible, it will be awful, it will be the end. So the fights. So the desperate efforts to make it all in one life, and thats greed. Thats excessive protections of ones security. But if you are really open, and you start looking around, you suddenly see that youre in a world where everything is absolutely incredible. Not simply lovely things like these blossoms here, but also the dust on the floor, little wiggles, cracks, and the quality of light in things. Thats whats so fascinating, the reflection of light on everything, becuase everything that exists is really a reflection of everything else. Reflection is ultimate. The reflection is a mirror, here, and when the curtain is drawn, it suddenly looks as if the Chrysler building is across the other side of the East River. You say, Well, it isnt really there, thats just a reflection.But the Chrysler building on THAT side of the river is a reflection. Some reflection, but thats what it is. The whole world is just energy bouncing. What exists if its not reflecting? Thats the clue: reflection. The reflective life, the contemplatory life, is therefore wisdom.  Alan Watts at deoxy.org   And these basic ideas I call myth, not using the word mythto mean simply something untrue, but to use the word mythin a more powerful sense. A myth is an image in terms of which we try to make sense of the world. Now, for example, a myth in a way is a metaphore. If you want to explain electricity to someone who doesnt know anything about electricity, you say, well, you talk about an electric current. Now, the word currentis borrowed from rivers. Its borrowed from hydrolics, and so you explain electricity in terms of water. Now, electricity is not water, it behaves actually in a different way, but there are some ways in which the behavior of water is like the behavior of electricty, and so you explain it in terms of water. Or if youre an astronomer, and you want to explain to people what you mean by an expanding universe and curved space, you say, well, its as if you have a black balloon, and there are white dots on the black balloon, and those dots represent galaxies, and as you blow the balloon up, uniformly all of them grow farther and farther apart. But youre using an analogy--the universe is not actually a black balloon with white dots on it. So in the same way, we use these sort of images to try and make sense of the world, and we at present are living under the influence of two very powerful images, which are, in the present state of scientific knowledge, inadequate, and one of the major problems today are to find an adequate, satisfying image of the world. Well thats what Im going to talk about. And Im going to go further than that, not only what image of the world to have, but how we can get our sensations and our feelings in accordance with the most sensible image of the world that we can manage to conceive. All right, now--the two images which we have been working under for 2000 years and maybe more are what I would call two models of the universe, and the first is called the ceramic model, and the second the fully automatic model. The ceramic model of the universe is based on the book of Genesis, from which Judaism, Islam, and Christianity derive their basic picture of the world. And the image of the world in the book of Genesis is that the world is an artifact. It is made, as a potter takes clay and forms pots out of it, or as a carpenter takes wood and makes tables and chairs out of it. Dont forget Jesus is the son of a carpenter. And also the son of God. So the image of God and of the world is based on the idea of God as a technician, potter, carpenter, architect, who has in mind a plan, and who fashions the universe in accordance with that plan.  So basic to this image of the world is the notion, you see, that the world consists of stuff, basically. Primoridial matter, substance, stuff. As parts are made of clay. Now clay by itself has no intelligence. Clay does not of itself become a pot, although a good potter may think otherwise. Because if you were a really good potter, you dont impose your will on the clay, you ask any given lump of clay what it wants to become, and you help it to do that. And then you become a genious. But the ordinary idea Im talking about is that simply clay is unintelligent; its just stuff, and the potter imposes his will on it, and makes it become whatever he wants. And so in the book of Genesis, the lord God creates Adam out of the dust of the Earth. In other words, he makes a clay figurine, and then he breathes into it, and it becomes alive. And because the clay become informed. By itself it is formless, it has no intelligence, and therefore it requires an external intelligence and an external energy to bring it to life and to bring some sense to it. And so in this way, we inherit a conception of ourselves as being artifacts, as being made, and it is perfectly natural in our culture for a child to ask its mother How was I made?or Who made me?And this is a very, very powerful idea, but for example, it is not shared by the Chinese, or by the Hindus. A Chinese child would not ask its mother How was I made?A Chinese child might ask its mother How did I grow?which is an entirely different procedure form making. You see, when you make something, you put it together, you arrange parts, or you work from the outside in, as a sculpture works on stone, or as a potter works on clay. But when you watch something growing, it works in exactly the opposite direction. It works from the inside to the outside. It expands. It burgeons. It blossoms. And it happens all of itself at once. In other words, the original simple form, say of a living cell in the womb, progressively complicates itself, and thats the growing process, and its quite different from the making process. But we have thought, historically, you see, of the world as something made, and the idea of being--trees, for example-- constructions, just as tables and houses are constructions. And so there is for that reason a fundamental difference between the made and the maker. And this image, this ceramic model of the universe, originated in cultures where the form of government was monarchial, and where, therefore, the maker of the universe was conceived also at the same time in the image of the king of the universe. King of kings, lords of lords, the only ruler of princes, who thus from thy throne behold all dwellers upon Earth.Im quoting the Book of Common Prayer. And so, all those people who are oriented to the universe in that way feel related to basic reality as a subject to a king. And so they are on very, very humble terms in relation to whatever it is that works all this thing. I find it odd, in the United States, that people who are citizens of a republic have a monarchial theory of the universe. That you can talk about the president of the United States as LBJ, or Ike, or Harry, but you cant talk about the lord of the universe in such familiar terms. Because we are carrying over from very ancient near-Eastern cultures, the notion that the lord of the universe must be respected in a certain way. Poeple kneel, people bow, people prostrate themselves, and you know what the reason for that is: that nobody is more frightened of anybody else than a tyrant. He sits with his back  to the wall, and his guards on either side of him, and he has you face downwards on the ground because you cant use weapons that way. When you come into his presence, you dont stand up and face him, because you might attack, and he has reason to fear that you might because hes ruling you all. And the man who rules you all is the biggest crook in the bunch. Because hes the one who succeeded in crime. The other people are pushed aside because they--the criminals, the people we lock up in jail--are simply the people who didnt make it. So naturally, the real boss sits with his back to the wall and his henchmen on either side of him. And so when you design a church, what does it look like? Catholic church, with the alter where it used to be--its changing now, because the Catholic religion is changing. But the Catholic church has the alter with its back to the wall at the east end of the church. And the alter is the throne and the priest is the chief vizier of the court, and he is making abeyance to the throne, but there is the throne of God, the alter. And all the people are facing it, and kneeling down. And a great Catholic cathederal is called a basilica, from the Greek basilikos,which means king.So a basilica is the house of a king, and the ritual of the church is based on the court rituals of Byzantium. A Protestant church is a little different. Basically the same. The furniture of a Protestant church is based on a judicial courthouse. The pulpit, the judge in an American court wears a black robe, he wears exactly the same dress as a Protestant minister. And everybody sits in these boxes, theres a box for the jury, theres a box for the judge, theres a box for this, theres a box for that, and those are the pews in an ordinary colonial- type Protestant church. So both these kinds of churches which have an autocratic view of the nature of the universe decorate themselves, are architecturally constructed in accordance with politcal images of the universe. One is the king, and the other is the judge. Your honor. Theres sense in this. When in court, you have to refer to the judge as your honor.It stops the people engaged in litigation from losing their tempers and getting rude. Theres a certain sense to that. But when you want to apply that image to the universe itself, to the very nature of life, it has limitations. For one thing, the idea of a difference between matter and spirit. This idea doesnt work anymore. Long, long ago, physicists stopped asking the question What is matter?They began that way. They wanted to know, what is the fundamental substance of the world? And the more they asked that question, the more they realized the couldnt answer it, because if youre going to say what matter is, youve got to describe it in terms of behavior, that is to say in terms of form, in terms of pattern. You tell what it does, you describe the smallest shapes of it which you can see. Do you see what happens? You look, say, at a piece of stone, and you want to say, Well, what is this piece of stone made of?You take your microscope and you look at it, and instead of just this block of stuff, you see ever so many tinier shapes. Little crystals. So you say, Fine, so far so good. Now what are these crystals made of?And you take a more powerful instrument, and you find that theyre made of molocules, and then you take a still more powerful instrument to find out what the molocules are made of, and you begin to describe atoms, electrons, protons, mesons, all sorts of sub-nuclear particles.  But you never, never arrive at the basic stuff. Because there isnt any. What happens is this: Stuffis a word for the world as it  looks when our eyes are out of focus. Fuzzy. Stuff--the idea of stuff is that it is undifferentiated, like some kind of goo. And when your eyes are not in sharp focus, everything looks fuzzy. When you get your eyes into focus, you see a form, you see a pattern. But when you want to change the level of magnification, and go in closer and closer and closer, you get fuzzy again before you get clear. So everytime you get fuzzy, you go through thinking theres some kind of stuff there. But when you get clear, you see a shape. So all that we can talk about is patterns. We never, never can talk about the stuffof which these patterns are supposed to be made, because you dont really have to suppose that there is any. Its enough to talk about the world in terms of patterns. It describes anything that can be described, and you dont really have to suppose that there is some stuff that constitutes the essence of the pattern in the same way that clay constitutes the essence of pots. And so for this reason, you dont really have to suppose that the world is some kind of helpless, passive, unintelligent junk which an outside agency has to inform and make into intelligent shapes. So the picture of the world in the most sophisticated physics of today is not formed stuff--potted clay--but pattern. A self-moving, self-designing pattern. A dance. And our common sense as individuals hasnt yet caught up with this. Well now, in the course of time, in the evolution of Western thought. The ceramic image of the world ran into trouble. And changed into what I call the fully automatic image of the world. In other words, Western science was based on the idea that there are laws of nature, and got that idea from Judaism and Christianity and Islam. That in other words, the potter, the maker of the world in the beginning of things laid down the laws, and the law of God, which is also the law of nature, is called the loggos.?,.And in Christianity, the loggos is the second person of the trinity, incarnate as Jesus Christ, who thereby is the perfect exemplar of the divine law. So we have tended to think of all natural phenomena as responding to laws, as if, in other words, the laws of the world were like the rails on which a streetcar or a tram or a train runs, and these things exist in a certain way, and all events respond to these laws. You know that limerick, There was a young man who said Damn,  For it certainly seems that I am  A creature that moves  In determinate grooves.  Im not even a bus, Im a tram.So heres this idea that theres kind of a plan, and everything responds and obeys that plan. Well, in the 18th century, Western intellectuals began to suspect this idea. And what they suspected was whether there is a lawmaker, whether there is an architect of the universe, and they found out, or they reasoned, that you dont have to suppose that there is. Why? Because the hypothesis of God does not help us to make any predictions. Nor does it-- In other words, lets put it this way: if the business of science is to make predictions about whats going to happen, science is essentially prophecy. Whats going to happen? By examining the behavior of the past and describing it carefully, we can make predictions about whats going to happen in the future. Thats really the whole of science. And to do this, and to make successful predictions, you do not need God as a hypothesis.  Because it makes no difference to anything. If you say Everything is controlled by God, everything is governed by God,that doesnt make any difference to your prediction of whats going to happen. And so what they did was drop that hypothesis. But they kept the hypothesis of law. Because if you can predict, if you can study the past and describe how things have behaved, and youve got some regularities in the behavior of the universe, you call that law. Although it may not be law in the ordinary sense of the word, its simply regularity. And so what they did was got rid of the lawmaker and kept the law. And so the conceived the universe in terms of a mechanism. Something, in other words, that is functioning according to regular, clocklike mechanical principles. Newtons whole image of the world is based on billiards. The atoms are billiard balls, and they bang each other around. And so your behavior, every individual around, is defined as a very, very complex arrangement of billiard balls being banged around by everything else. And so behind the fully automatic model of the universe is the notion that reality itself is, to use the favorite term of 19th century scientists, blind energy. In say the metaphysics of Ernst Hegel, and T.H. Huxley, the world is basically nothing but energy--blind, unintelligent force. And likewise and parallel to this, in the philosophy of Freud, the basic psychological energy is libido, which is blind lust. And it is only a fluke, it is only as a result of pure chances that resulting from the exuberance of this energy there are people. With values, with reason, with languages, with cultures, and with love. Just a fluke. Like, you know, 1000 monkeys typing on 1000 typewriters for a million years will eventually type the Encyclopedia Britannica. And of course the moment they stop typing the Encyclopedia Britannica, they will relapse into nonsense. And so in order that that shall not happen, for you and I are flukes in this cosmos, and we like our way of life--we like being human--if we want to keep it, say these people, weve got to fight nature, because it will turn us back into nonsense the moment we let it. So weve got to impose our will upon this world as if we were something completely alien to it. From outside. And so we get a culture based on the idea of the war between man and nature. And we talk about the conquest of space. The conquest of Everest. And the great symbols of our culture are the rocket and the bulldozer. The rocket--you know, compensation for the sexually inadequate male. So were going to conquer space. You know were in space already, way out. If anybody cared to be sensitive and let outside space come to you, you can, if your eyes are clear enough. Aided by telescopes, aided by radio astronomy, aided by all the kinds of sensitive instruments we can devise. Were as far out in space as were ever going to get. But, yknow, sensitivity isnt the pitch. Especially in the WASP culture of the United States. We define manliness in terms of agression, you see, because were a little bit frightened as to whether or not were really men. And so we put on this great show of being a tough guy. Its completely unneccesary. If you have what it takes, you dont need to put on that show. And you dont need to beat nature into submission. Why be hostile to nature? Because after all, you ARE a symptom of nature. You, as a human being, you grow  out of this physical universe in exactly the same way an apple grows off an apple tree. So lets say the tree which grows apples is a tree which apples, using appleas a verb. And a world in which human beings arrive is a world that peoples. And so the existence of people is symptomatic of the kind of universe we live in. Just as spots on somebodys skin is symptomatic of chicken pox. Just as hair on a head is symptomatic of whats going on in the organism. But we have been brought up by reason of our two great myths--the ceramic and the automatic--not to feel that we belong in the world. So our popular speech reflects it. You say I came into this world.You didnt. You came out of it. You say Face facts.We talk about encounterswith reality, as if it was a head-on meeting of completely alien agencies. And the average person has the sensation that he is a someone that exists inside a bag of skin. The center of consciousness that looks out at this thing, and what the hells it going to do to me? You see? I recognize you, you kind of look like me, and Ive seen myself in a mirror, and you look like you might be people.So maybe youre intelligent and maybe you can love, too. Perhaps youre all right, some of you are, anyway. Youve got the right color of skin, or you have the right religion, or whatever it is, youre OK. But there are all those people over in Asia, and Africa, and they may not really be people. When you want to destroy someone, you always define them as unpeople.Not really human. Monkeys, maybe. Idiots, maybe. Machines, maybe, but not people. So we have this hostility to the external world because of the superstition, the myth, the absolutely unfounded theory that you, yourself, exist only inside your skin. Now I want to propose another idea altogether. There are two great theories in astronomy going on right now about the origination of the universe. One is called the explosion theory, and the other is called the steady state theory. The steady state people say there never was a time when the world began, its always expanding, yes, but as a result of free hydrogen in space, the free hydrogen coagulates and makes new galaxies. But the other people say there was a primoridial explosion, an enormous bang billions of years ago which flung all the galazies into space. Well lets take that just for the sake of argument and say that was the way it happened. Its like you took a bottle of ink and you threw it at a wall. Smash! And all that ink spread. And in the middle, its dense, isnt it? And as it gets out on the edge, the little droplets get finer and finer and make more complicated patterns, see? So in the same way, there was a big bang at the beginning of things and it spread. And you and I, sitting here in this room, as complicated human beings, are way, way out on the fringe of that bang. We are the complicated little patterns on the end of it. Very interesting. But so we define ourselves as being only that. If you think that you are only inside your skin, you define yourself as one very complicated little curlique, way out on the edge of that explosion. Way out in space, and way out in time. Billions of years ago, you were a big bang, but now youre a complicated human being. And then we cut ourselves off, and dont feel that were still the big bang. But you are. Depends how you define yourself. You are actually--if this is the way things started,  if there was a big bang in the beginning-- youre not something thats a result of the big bang. Youre not something that is a sort of puppet on the end of the process. You are still the process. You are the big bang, the original force of the universe, coming on as whoever you are. When I meet you, I see not just what you define yourself as--Mr so-and- so, Ms so-and-so, Mrs so-and-so--I see every one of you as the primordial energy of the universe coming on at me in this particular way. I know Im that, too. But weve learned to define ourselves as separate from it. And so what I would call a basic problem weve got to go through first, is to understand that there are no such things as things. That is to say separate things, or separate events. That that is only a way of talking. If you can understand this, youre going to have no further problems. I once asked a group of high school children What do you mean by a thing?First of all, they gave me all sorts of synonyms. They said Its an object,which is simply another word for a thing; it doesnt tell you anything about what you mean by a thing. Finally, a very smart girl from Italy, who was in the group, said a thing is a noun. And she was quite right. A noun isnt a part of nature, its a part of speech. There are no nouns in the physical world. There are no separate things in the physical world, either. The physical world is wiggly. Clouds, mountains, trees, people, are all wiggly. And only when human beings get to working on things--they build buildings in straight lines, and try to make out that the world isnt really wiggly. But here we are, sitting in this room all built out of straight lines, but each one of us is as wiggly as all get-out. Now then, when you want to get control of something that wiggles, its pretty difficult, isnt it? You try and pick up a fish in your hands, and the fish is wiggly and it slips out. What do you do to get hold of the fish? You use a net. And so the net is the basic thing we have for getting hold of the wiggly world. So if you want to get hold of this wiggle, youve got to put a net over it. A net is something regular. And I can number the holes in a net. So many holes up, so many holes across. And if I can number these holes, I can count exactly where each wiggle is, in terms of a hole in that net. And thats the beginning of calculus, the art of measuring the world. But in order to do that, Ive got to break up the wiggle into bits. Ive got to call this a specific bit, and this the next bit of the wiggle, and this the next bit, and this the next bit of the wiggle. And so these bits are things or events. Bit of wiggles. Which I mark out in order to talk about the wiggle. In order to measure and therfore in order to control it. But in nature, in fact, in the physical world, the wiggle isnt bitted. Like you dont get a cut-up fryer out of an egg. But you have to cut the chicken up in order to eat it. You bite it. But it doesnt come bitten. So the world doesnt come thinged; it doesnt come evented. You and I are all as much continuous with the physical universe as a wave is continuous with the ocean. The ocean waves, and the universe peoples. And as I wave and say to you Yoo-hoo!the world is waving with me at you and saying Hi! Im here!But we are consciousness of the way we feel and sense our existence. Being based on a myth that we are made, that we are parts, that we are things, our consciousness has been influenced, so that each one of us does not feel that. We have been hypnotized, literally hypnotized by social convention into feeling and sensing that we  exist only inside our skins. That we are not the original bang, just something out on the end of it. And therefore we are scared stiff. My wave is going to disappear, and Im going to die! And that would be awful. Weve got a mythology going now which is, as Father Maskell.?, put it, we are something that happens between the maternity ward and the crematorium. And thats it. And therefore everybody feels unhappy and miserable. This is what people really believe today. You may go to church, you may say you believe in this, that, and the other, but you dont. Even Jehovahs Witnesses, who are the most fundamental of fundamentalists, they are polite when they come around and knock on the door. But if you REALLY believed in Christianity, you would be screaming in the streets. But nobody does. You would be taking full- page ads in the paper every day. You would be the most terrifying television programs. The churches would be going out of their minds if they really believed what they teach. But they dont. They think they ought to believe what they teach. They believe they should believe, but they dont really believe it, because what we REALLY believe is the fully automatic model. And that is our basic, plausible common sense. You are a fluke. You are a separate event. And you run from the maternity ward to the crematorium, and thats it, baby. Thats it. Now why does anybody think that way? Theres no reason to, because it isnt even scientific. Its just a myth. And its invented by people who want to feel a certain way. They want to play a certain game. The game of god got embarrassing. The idea if God as the potter, as the architect of the universe, is good. It makes you feel that life is, after all, important. There is someone who cares. It has meaning, it has sense, and you are valuable in the eyes of the father. But after a while, it gets embarrassing, and you realize that everything you do is being watched by God. He knows your tiniest innermost feelings and thoughts, and you say after a while, Quit bugging me! I dont want you around.So you become an athiest, just to get rid of him. Then you feel terrible after that, because you got rid of God, but that means you got rid of yourself. Youre nothing but a machine. And your idea that youre a machine is just a machine, too. So if youre a smart kid, you commit suicide. Camus said there is only one serious philosophical question, which is whether or not to commit suicide. I think there are four or five serious philosophical questions. The first one is Who started it?The second is Are we going to make it?The third is Where are we going to put it?The fourth is Whos going to clean up?And the fifth, Is it serious?But still, should you or not commit suicide? This is a good question. Why go on? And you only go on if the game is worth the gamble. Now the universe has been going on for an incredible long time. And so really, a satisfactory theory of the universe has to be one thats worth betting on. Thats very, it seems to me, elementary common sense. If you make a theory of the universe which isnt worth betting on, why bother? Just commit suicide. But if you want to go on playing the game, youve got to have an optimal theory for playing the game. Otherwise theres no point in it. But the people who coined the fully automatic theory of the universe were playing a very funny game, for what they wanted to say was this: all you people who believe in religion--old ladies and wishful thinkers-- youve got a big daddy up there, and you want comfort, but life is rough. Life is tough, as success goes to the most hard- headed people. That was a very convenient theory when the European and American worlds were colonizing the natives everywhere else. They said Were the end product of evolution,  and were tough. Im a big strong guy because I face facts, and life is just a bunch of junk, and Im going to impose my will on it and turn it into something else. Im real hard.Thats a way of flattering yourself. And so, it has become academically plausible and fashionable that this is the way the world works. In academic circles, no other theory of the world than the fully automatic model is respectable. Because if youre an academic person, youve got to be an intellectually tough person, youve got to be prickly. There are basically two kinds of philosophy. Ones called prickles, the others called goo. And prickly people are precise, rigorous, logical. They like everything chopped up and clear. Goo people like it vague. For example, in physics, prickly people believe that the ultimate constituents of matter are particles. Goo people believe its waves. And in philosophy, prickly people are logical positivists, and goo people are idealists. And theyre always arguing with each other, but what they dont realize is neither one can take his position without the other person. Because you wouldnt know you advocated prickles unless there was someone advocating goo. You wouldnt know what a prickle was unless you knew what a goo was. Because life isnt either prickles or goo, its either gooey prickles or prickly goo. They go together like back and front, male and female. And thats the answer to philosophy. You see, Im a philosopher, and Im not going to argue very much, because if you dont argue with me, I dont know what I think. So if we argue, I say Thank you,because owing to the courtesy of your taking a different point of view, I understand what I mean. So I cant get rid of you. But however, you see, this whole idea that the universe is nothing at all but unintelligent force playing around and not even enjoying it is a putdown theory of the world. People who had an advantage to make, a game to play by putting it down, and making out that because they put the world down they were a superior kind of people. So that just wont do. Weve had it. Because if you seriously go along with this idea of the world, youre what is technically called alienated. You feel hostile to the world. You feel that the world is a trap. It is a mechanism, it is electronic and neurological mechanisms into which you somehow got caught. And you, poor thing, have to put up with being put into a body thats falling apart, that gets cancer, that gets the great Siberian itch, and is just terrible. And these mechanics--doctors--are trying to help you out, but they really cant succeed in the end, and youre just going to fall apart, and its a grim business, and its just too bad. So if you think thats the way things are, you might as well commit suicide right now. Unless you say, Well, Im damned. Because there might really be after all eternal damnation. Or I identify with my children, and I think of them going on without me and nobody to support them. Because if I do go on in this frame of mind and continue to support them, I shall teach them to be like I am, and theyll go on, dragging it out to support their children, and they wont enjoy it. Theyll be afraid to commit suicide, and so will their children. Theyll all learn the same lessons.So you see, all Im trying to say is that the basic common sense about the nature of the world that is influencing most people in the United States today is simply a myth. If you want to say that the idea of God the father with his white beard on the golden throne is a myth, in a bad sense of the word myth,so is this other one. It is  just as phony and has just as little to support it as being the true state of affairs. Why? Lets get this clear. If there is any such thing at all as intelligence and love and beauty, well youve found it in other people. In other words, it exists in us as human beings. And as I said, if it is there, in us, it is symptomatic of the scheme of things. We are as symptomatic of the scheme of things as the apples are symptomatic of the apple tree or the rose of the rose bush. The Earth is not a big rock infested with living organisms any more than your skeleton is bones infested with cells. The Earth is geological, yes, but this geological entity grows people, and our existence on the Earth is a symptom of this other system, and its balances, as much as the solar system in turn is a symptom of our galaxy, and our galaxy in its turn is a symptom of a whole company of other galaxies. Goodness only knows what thats in. But you see, when, as a scientist, you describe the behavior of a living organism, you try to say what a person does, its the only way in which you can describe what a person is, describe what they do. Then you find out that in making this description, you cannot confine yourself to what happens inside the skin. In other words, you cannot talk about a person walking unless you start describing the floor, because when I walk, I dont just dangle my legs in empty space. I move in relationship to a room. So in order to describe what Im doing when Im walking, I have to describe the room; I have to describe the territory. So in describing my talking at the moment, I cant describe it as just a thing in itself, because Im talking to you. And so what Im doing at the moment is not completely described unless your being here is described also. So if that is necessary, in other words, in order to describe MY behavior, I have to describe YOUR behavior and the behavior of the environment, it means that weve really got one system of behavior. Your skin doesnt separate you from the world; its a bridge through which the external world flows into you, and you flow into it.   Just, for example, as a whirlpool in water, you could say because you have a skin you have a definite shape you have a definite form. All right? Here is a flow of water, and suddenly it does a whirlpool, and it goes on. The whirlpool is a definite form, but no water stays put in it. The whirlpool is something the stream is doing, and exactly the same way, the whole universe is doing each one of us, and I see each one of you today and I recognize you tomorrow, just as I would recognize a whirlpool in a stream. Id say Oh yes, Ive seen that whirlpool before, its just near so-and-sos house on the edge of the river, and its always there.So in the same way when I meet you tomorrow, I recognize you, youre the same whirlpool you were yesterday. But youre moving. The whole world is moving through you, all the cosmic rays, all the food youre eating, the stream of steaks and milk and eggs and everything is just flowing right through you. When youre wiggling the same way, the world is wiggling, the stream is wiggling you. But the problem is, you see, we havent been taught to feel that way. The myths underlying our culture and underlying our  common sense have not taught us to feel identical with the universe, but only parts of it, only in it, only confronting it--aliens. And we are, I think, quite urgently in need of coming to feel that we ARE the eternal universe, each one of us. Otherwise were going to go out of our heads. Were going to commit suicide, collectively, courtesy of H-bombs. And, all right, supposing we do, well that will be that, then there will be life making experiments on other galaxies. Maybe theyll find a better game.  Instead of that, we either treat a child with a kind of with a kind of blah-blah-blahattitude, or coochy-coochy-coochie,yknow? and dont treat the thing as a human being at all--as a kind of doll. Or else as a nusiance. And so all of us, having been treated that way, carry over into adult life the sense of being on probation here. Either the god is somebody who says to us coochy- coochy-coochie,or blah-blah-blah.And thats the feeling we carry over. So that idea of the royal god, the king of kings and the lord of lords which we inherit from the political structures of the Tigres-Euphrates cultures, and from Egypt. The Pharoah, Amenhotep IV is probably, as Freud suggested, the original author of Mosesmonotheism, and certainly the Jewish law code comes from Hammarabi in Chaldea. And these men lived in a culture where the pyramid and the ziggurat--the ziggurat is the Chaldean version of the pyramid, indicating somehow a hierarchy of power, from the boss on down. And God, in this first myth that weve been discussing, the ceramic myth is the boss, and the idea of God is that the universe is governed from above. But do you see, this parallels--goes hand in hand with the idea that you govern your own body. That the ego, which lies somewhere between the ears and behind the eyes in the brain, is the governer of the body. And so we cant understand a system of order, a system of life, in which there isnt a governer. O Lord, our governor, how excellent is thy name in all the world.But supposing, on the contrary, there could be a system which doesnt have a governor. Thats what we are supposed to have in this society. We are supposed to be a democracy and a republic. And we are supposed to govern ourselves. As I said, its so funny that Americans can be politically republican--I dont mean republican in the party sense--and yet religiously monarchial. Its a real strange contradiction. So what is this universe? Is it a monarchy? Is it a republic? Is it a mechanism? Or an organism? Becuase you see, if its a mechanism, either its a mere mechanism, as in the fully automatic model, or else its a mechanism under the control of a driver. A mechanic. If its not that, its an organism, and an organism is a thing that governs itself. In your body there is no boss. You could argue, for example, that the brain is a gadget evolved by the stomach, in order to serve the stomach for the purposes of getting food. Or you can argue that the stomach is a gadget evolved by the brain to feed it and keep it alive. Whose game is this? Is it the brains game, or the stomachs game? Theyre mutual. The brain implies the stomach and the stomach implies the brain, and neither of them is the boss. You know that story about all the limbs of the body. The hand said We do all our work,the feet said We do our work,the mouth said We do all the chewing, and heres this lazy stomach who just gets it all and doesnt do a thing. He didnt do any work, so lets go on strike.And the hands refused to carry, the feet refused to walk, the teeth refused to chew, and said Now were on strike against the stomach.But after a while, all of them found themselves getting weaker and weaker and weaker, because they didnt realize that the stomach fed them. So there is the possibility then that we are not in the kind of system that these two myths delineate. That we are not living in a world where we ourselves, in the deepest sense of self, are outside reality, and somehow in a position that we have to bow down to it and say As a great favor, please preserve us in existence.Nor are we in a system which is merely mechanical, and which we are nothing but flukes, trapped in the electrical wiring of a nervous system which is fundamentally rather inefficiently arranged. Whats the alternative? Well, we could put the alternative in another image altogether, and Ill call this not the ceramic image, not the fully automatic image, but the dramatic image. Consider the world as a drama. Whats the basis of all drama? The basis of all stories, of all plots, of all happenings--is the game of hide and seek. You get a baby, whats the fundamental first game you play with a baby? You put a book in front of your face, and you peek at the baby. The baby starts giggling. Because the baby is close to the origins of life; it comes from the womb really knowing what its all about, but it cant put it into words. See, what every child psychologist really wants to know is to get a baby to talk psychological jargon, and explain how it feels. But the baby knows; you do this, this, this and this, and the baby starts laughing, because the baby is a recent incarnation of God. And the baby knows, therefore, that hide and seek is the basic game. See, when we were children, we were taught 1, 2, 3,and A, B, C,but we werent set down on our mothersknees and taught the game of black and white. Thats the thing that was left out of all our educations, the game that I was trying to explain with these wave diagrams. That life is not a conflict between opposites, but a polarity. The difference bewteen a conflict and a polarity is simply--when you think about opposite things, we sometimes use the expression, These two things are the poles apart.You say, for example, about someone with whom you totally disagree, I am the poles apart from this person.But your very saying that gives the show away. Poles. Poles are the opposite ends of one magnet. And if you take a magnet, say you have a magnetized bar, theres a north pole and a south pole. Okay, chop off the south pole, move it away. The piece youve got left creates a new south pole. You never get rid of the south pole. So the point about a magnet is, things may be the poles apart, but they go together. You cant have the one without the other. We are imagining a diagram of the universe in which the idea of polarity is the opposite ends of the diameter, north and south, you see? Thats the basic idea of polarity, but what were trying to imagine is the encounter of forces that come from absolutely opposed realms, that have nothing in common. When we say of two personality types that theyre the poles apart. We are trying to think eccentrically, instead of concentrically. And so in this way, we havent realized that life and death, black and white, good and evil, being and non-being, come from the same center. They imply each other, so that you wouldnt know the one without the other. Now Im not saying that thats bad, thats fun. Youre playing the game that you dont know that black and white imply each other. Therefore you think that black possibly might win, that the light might go out, that the sound might never be heard again. That there could be the possibility of a universe of pure tragedy, of endless, endless darkness. Wouldnt that be awful? Only you wouldnt know it was awful, if thats what happened. The point that we all forget is that the black and the white go together, and there isnt the one without the other. At the same time, you see, we forget, in the same way as we forget that these two go together.   The other thing we forget, is that self and other go together, in just the same way as the two poles of a magnet. You say I, myself; I am me; I am this individual; I am this particular, unique instance.What is other is everything else. All of you, all of the stars, all of the galaxies, way, way out into infinite space, thats other. But in the same way as black implies white, self implies other. And you dont exist without all that, so that where you get these polarities, you get this sort of difference, that what we call explicitly, or exoterically, theyre different. But implicitely, esoterically, theyre one. Since you cant have the one without the other, that shows theres a kind of inner conspiracy bewteen all pairs of opposites, which is not in the open, but its tacit. Its like you say Well, there are all sorts of things that we understand among each other tacitly, that we dont want to admit, but we do recognize tacity theres a kind of secret between us boys and girls,or whatever it may be. And we recognize that. So, tacitly, all of you really inwardly know--although you wont admit it because your culture has trained you in a contrary direction--all of you really inwardly know that you as an individual self are inseparable from everything else that exists, that you are a special case in the universe. But the whole game, especially of Western culture, is to coneal that from ourselves, so that when anybody in our culture slips into the state of consciousness where they suddenly find this to be true, and they come on and say Im God,we say Youre insane.Now, its very difficult--you can very easily slip into the state of consciousness where you feel youre God; it can happen to anyone. Just in the same way as you can get the flu, or measles, or something like that, you can slip into this state of consciousness. And when you get it, it depends upon your background and your training as to how youre going to interpret it. If youve got the idea of god that comes from popular Christianity, God as the governor, the political head of the world, and you think youre God, then you say to everybody, You should bow down and worship me.But if youre a member of Hindu culture, and you suddenly tell all your friends Im God,instead of saying Youre insane,they say Congratulations! At last, you found out.Becuase their idea of god is not the autocratic governor. When they make images of Shiva, he has ten arms. How would you use ten arms? Its hard enough to use two. You know, if you play the organ, youve got to use your two feet and your two hands, and you play different rhythms with each member. Its kind of tricky. But actually were all masters at this, because how do you grow each hair without having to think about it? Each nerve? How do you beat your heart and digest with your stomach at the same time? You dont have to think about it. In your very body, you are omnipotent in the true sense of omnipotence, which is that you are able to be omni-potent; you are able to do all these things without having to think about it. When I was a child, I used to ask my mother all sorts of ridiculous questions, which of course every child asks, and when she got bored with my questions, she said Darling, there are just some things which we are not meant to know.I said Will we ever know?She said Yes, of course, when we die and go to heaven, God will make everything plain.So I used to imagine on wet afternoons in heaven, wed all sit around the throne of grace and say to God, Well why did you do this, and why did you do that?and he would explain it to us. Heavenly father, why are the leaves green?and he would say Because of the chlorophyll,and wed say Oh.But in he Hindu universe, you would say to God, How did you make the mountains?and he would say Well, I just did it. Because when youre asking me how did I make the mountains, youre asking me to describe in words how I made the mountains, and there are no words which can do this. Words cannot tell you how I made the mountains any more than I can drink the ocean with a fork. A fork may be useful for sticking into a piece of something and eating it, but its of no use for imbibing the ocean. It would take millions of years. In other words, it would take millions of years, and you would be bored with my description, long before I got through it, if I put it to you in words, because I didnt create the mountains with words, I just did it. Like you open and close your hand. You know how you do this, but can you describe in words how you do it? Even a very good physiologist cant describe it in words. But you do it. Youre conscious, arent you. Dont you know how you manage to be conscious? Do you know how you beat your heart? Can you say in words, explain correctly how this is done? You do it, but you cant put it into words, because words are too clumsy, yet you manage this expertly for as long as youre able to do it.But you see, we are playing a game. The game runs like this: the only thing you really know is what you can put into words. Lets suppose I love some girl, rapturously, and somebody says to me, Do you REALLY love her?Well, how am I going to prove this? Theyll say, Write poetry. Tell us all how much you love her. Then well believe you.So if Im an artist, and can put this into words, and can convince everybody Ive written the most ecstatic love letter ever written, they say All right, ok, we admit it, you really do love her.But supposing youre not very articulate, are we going to tell you you DONT love her? Surely not. You dont have to be Heloise and Abyla to be in love. But the whole game that our culture is playing is that nothing really happens unless its in the newspaper. So when were at a party, and its a great party, somebody says Too bad we didnt bring a camera. Too bad there wasnt a tape recorder. And so our children begin to feel that they dont exist authentically unless they get their names in the papers, and the fastest way to get your name in the paper is to commit a crime. Then youll be photographed, and youll appear in court, and everybody will notice you. And youre THERE. So youre not there unless youre recorded. It really happened if it was recorded. In other words, if you shout, and it doesnt come back and echo, it didnt happen. Well thats a real hangup. Its true, the fun with echos; we all like singing in the bathtub, because theres more resonance there. And when we play a musical instrument, like a violin or a cello, it has a sounding box, because that gives resonance to the sound. And in the same way, the cortex of the human brain enables us when were happy to know that were happy, and that gives a certain resonance to it. If youre happy, and you dont know youre happy, theres nobody home. But this is the whole problem for us. Several thousand years ago, human beings devolved the system of self-consciousness, and they knew, they knew. The way the animals live, everybody envies them, because look, a cat, when it walks--did you ever see a cat making an aesthetic mistake. Did you ever see a badly formed cloud? Were the stars ever misarranged? When you watch the foam breaking on the seashore, did it ever make a bad pattern? Never. And yet we think in what we do, we make mistakes. And were worried about that. So there came this point in human evolution when we lost our innocence. When we lost this thing that the cats and the flowers have, and had to think about it, and had to purposely arrange and discipline and push our lives around in accordance with foresight and words and systems of symbols, accountancy, calculation and so on, and then we worry. Once you start thinking about things, you worry as to if you thought enough. Did you really take all the details into consideration? Was every fact properly reviewed? And by jove, the more you think about it, the more you realize you really couldnt take everything into consideration, becauase all the variables in every decision are incalculable, so you get anxiety. And this, though, also, is the price you pay for knowing that you know. For being able to think about thinking, being able to feel about feeling. And so youre in this funny position. Now then, do you see that this is simultaneously an advantage and a terrible disadvantage? What has happened here is that by having a certain kind of consciousness, a certain kind of reflexive consciousness--being aware of being aware. Being able to represent what goes on fundamentally in terms of a system of symbols, such as words, such as numbers. You put, as it were, two lives together at once, one representing the other. The symbols representing the reality, the money representing the wealth, and if you dont realize that the symbol is really secondary, it doesnt have the same value. People go to the supermarket, and they get a whole cartload of goodies and they drive it through, then the clerk fixes up the counter and this long tape comes out, and hell say $30, please,and everybody feels depressed, because they give away $30 worth of paper, but theyve got a cartload of goodies. They dont think about that, they think theyve just lost $30. But youve got the real wealth in the cart, all youve parted with is the paper. Because the paper in our system becomes more valuable than the wealth. It represents power, potentiality, whereas the wealth, you think oh well, thats just necessary; youve got to eat. Thats to be really mixed up. So then. If you awaken from this illusion, and you understand that black implies white, self implies other, life implies death--or shall I say, death implies life--you can conceive yourself. Not conceive, but FEEL yourself, not as a stranger in the world, not as someone here on sufferance, on probation, not as something that has arrived here by fluke, but you can begin to feel your own existence as absolutely fundamental. What you are basically, deep, deep down, far, far in, is simply the fabric and structure of existence itself. So, say in Hindu mythology, they say that the world is the drama of God. God is not something in Hindu mythology with a white beard that sits on a throne, that has royal perogatives. God in Indian mythology is the self, Satchitananda.Which means sat,that which is, chit,that which is consciousness; that which is anandais bliss. In other words, what exists, reality itself is gorgeous, it is the fullness of total joy. Wowee! And all those stars, if you look out in the sky, is a firework display like you see on the fourth of July, which is a great occasion for celebration; the universe is a celebration, it is a fireworks show to celebrate that existence is. Wowee. And then they say, But, however, theres no point in just sustaining bliss.Lets suppose you were able, every night, to dream any dream you wanted to dream, and that you could for example have the power to dream in one night 75 years worth of time. Or any length of time you wanted to have. And you would, naturally, as you began on this adventure of dreams, fulfill all your wishes. You would have every kind of pleasure you could conceive. And after several nights of 75 years of total pleasure each, you would say Well, that was pretty great. But now lets have a surprise. Lets have a dream which isnt under control, where something is going to happen to me that I dont know what its going to be.And you would dig that, and come out of it and say That was a close shave, now wasnt it?Then you would get more and more adventurous, and you would make further and further gambles as to what you would dream, and finally you would dream where you are now. You would dream the dream of the life that you are actually living today. That would be within the infinite multiplicity of the choices you would have. Of playing that you werent God. Because the whole nature of the godhead, according to this idea, is to play that hes not. The first thing that he says to himself is Man, get lost,because he gives himself away. The nature of love is self-abandonment, not clinging to oneself. Throwing yourself out, for instance as in basketball; youre always getting rid of the ball. You say to the other fellow Have a ball.See? And that keeps things moving. Thats the nature of life. So in this idea, then, everybody is fundamentally the ultimate reality. Not God in a politically kingly sense, but God in the sense of being the self, the deep-down basic whatever there is. And youre all that, only youre pretending youre not. And its perfectly OK to pretend youre not, to be perfectly convinced, because this is the whole notion of drama. When you come into the theater, there is an arch, and a stage, and down there is the audience. Everybody assumes their seats in the theater, gone to see a comedy, a tragedy, a thriller, whatever it is, and they all know as they come in and pay their admissions, that what is going to happen on the stage is not for real. But the actors have a conspiracy against this, because theyre going to try and persuade the audience that what is happening on the stage IS for real. They want to get everybody sitting on the edge of their chairs, they want you terrified, or crying, or laughing. Absolutely captivated by the drama. And if a skillful human actor can take in an audience and make people cry, think what the cosmic actor can do. Why he can take himself in completely. He can play so much for real that he thinks he really is. Like you sitting in this room, you think youre really here. Well, youve persuaded yourself that way. Youve acted it so damn well that you KNOW that this is the real world. But youre playing it. As well, the audience and the actor as one. Because behind the stage is the green room, offscene, where the actors take off their masks. Do you know that the word personmeans mask? The personawhich is the mask worn by actors in Greco-Roman drama, because it has a megaphone-type mouth which throws the sound out in an open-air theater. So the per--through--sona--what the sound comes through--thats the mask. How to be a real person. How to be a genuine fake. So the dramatis personaat the beginning of a play is the list of masks that the actors will wear. And so in the course of forgetting that this world is a drama, the word for the role, the word for the mask has come to mean who you are genuinely. The person. The proper person. Incidentally, the word parsonis derived from the word person.The personof the village. The personaround town, the parson. So anyway, then, this is a drama, and what I want you to is-- Im not trying to sell you on this idea in the sense of converting you to it; I want you to play with it. I want you to think of its possibilities. Im not trying to prove it, Im just putting it forward as a possibility of life to think about. So then, this means that youre not victims of a scheme of things, of a mechanical world, or of an autocratic god. The life youre living is what YOU have put yourself into. Only you dont admit it, because you want to play the game that its happened to you. In other words, I got mixed up in this world; I had a father who got hot pants over a girl, and she was my mother, and because he was just a horny old man, and as a result of that, I got born, and I blame him for it and say Well thats your fault; youve got to look after me,and he says I dont see why I should look after you; youre just a result.But lets suppose we admit that I really wanted to get born, and that I WAS the ugly gleam in my fathers eye when he approached my mother. That was me. I was desire. And I deliberately got involved in this thing. Look at it that way instead. And that really, even if I got myself into an awful mess, and I got born with syphilis, and the great Siberian itch, and tuberculosis in a Nazi concentration camp, nevertheless this was a game, which was a very far out play. It was a kind of cosmic masochism. But I did it. Isnt that an optimal game rule for life? Because if you play life on the supposition that youre a helpless little puppet that got involved. Or you played on the supposition that its a frightful, serious risk, and that we really ought to do something about it, and so on, its a drag. Theres no point in going on living unless we make the assumption that the situation of life is optimal. That really and truly were all in a state of total bliss and delight, but were going to pretend we arent just for kicks. In other words, you play non-bliss in order to be able to experience bliss. And you can go as far out in non-bliss as you want to go. And when you wake up, itll be great. You know, you can slam yourself on the head with a hammer because its so nice when you stop. And it makes you realize how great things are when you forget thats the way it is. And thats just like black and white: you dont know black unless you know white; you dont know white unless you know black. This is simply fundamental. So then, heres the drama. My metaphysics, let me be perfectly frank with you, are that there the central self, you can call it God, you can call it anything you like, and its all of us. Its playing all the parts of all being whatsoever everywhere and anywhere. And its playing the game of hide and seek with itself. It gets lost, it gets involved in the farthest-out adventures, but in the end it always wakes up and comes back to itself. And when youre ready to wake up, youre going to wake up, and if youre not ready youre going to stay pretending that youre just a poor little me.And since youre all here and engaged in this sort of enquiry and listening to this sort of lecture, I assume youre all in the process of waking up. Or else youre pleasing yourselves with some kind of flirtation with waking up which youre not serious about. But I assume that you are maybe not serious, but sincere, that you are ready to wake up. So then, when youre in the way of waking up, and finding out who you are, you meet a character called a guru, as the Hindus say the teacher,the awakener.And what is the function of a guru? Hes the man that looks you in the eye and says Oh come off it. I know who you are.You come to the guru and say Sir, I have a problem. Im unhappy, and I want to get one up on the universe. I want to become enlightened. I want spiritual wisdom.The guru looks at you adn says Who are you?You know Sri-Ramana-Maharshi, that great Hindu sage of modern times? People used to come to him and say Master, who was I in my last incarnation?As if that mattered. And he would say Who is asking the question?And hed look at you and say, go right down to it, Youre looking at me, youre looking out, and youre unaware of whats behind your eyes. Go back in and find out who you are, where the question comes from, why you ask.And if youve looked at a photograph of that man--I have a gorgeous photograph of him; I look by it every time I go out the front door. And I look at those eyes, and the humor in them; the lilting laugh that says Oh come off it. Shiva, I recognize you. When you come to my door and say `Im so-and-so,I say `Ha-ha, what a funny way God has come on today.So eventually--there are all sorts of tricks of course that gurus play. They say Well, were going to put you through the mill.And the reason they do that is simply that you wont wake up until you feel youve paid a price for it. In other words, the sense of guilt that one has. Or the sense of anxiety. Its simply the way one experiences keeping the game of disguise going on. Do you see that? Supposing you say I feel guilty.Christianity makes you feel guilty for existing. That somehow the very fact that you exist is an affront. You are a fallen human being. I remember as a child when we went to the serves of the church on Good Friday. They gave us each a colored postcard with Jesus crucified on it, and it said underneath This I have done for thee. What doest thou for me?You felt awful. YOU had nailed that man to the cross. Because you eat steak, you have crucified Christ. Mythra. Its the same mystery. And what are you going to do about that? This I have done for thee, what doest thou for me?You feel awful that you exist at all. But that sense of guilt is the veil across the sanctuary. Dont you DARE come in!In all mysteries, when you are going to be initiated, theres somebody saying Ah-ah-ah, dont you come in. Youve got to fulfill this requirement and that requirement, THEN well let you in.And so you go through the mill. Why? Because youre saying to yourself I wont wake up until I deserve it. I wont wake up until Ive made it difficult for me to wake up. So I invent for myself an eleborate sytem of delaying my waking up. I put myself through this test and that test, and when I convince myself its sufficiently arduous, THEN I at last admit to myself who I really am, and draw aside the veil and realize that after all, when all is said and done, I am that I am, which is the name of god. So, in a way, then, in order to bring this to the front, in order to know that is the case, you have to be kidded out of your game. And so what I want to discuss this morning is how this happens. Although before doing so, I must go a little bit further into the whole nature of this problem. You see, the problem is this. We identify in our exerience a differentiation between what we do and what happens to us. We have a certain number of actions that we define as voluntary, and we feel in control of those. And then over against that, there is all those things that are involuntary. But the dividing line between these two is very inarbitrary. Because for example, when you move your hand, you feel that you decide whether to open it or to close it. But then ask yourself how do you decide? When you decide to open your hand, do you first decide to decide? You dont, do you? You just decide, and how do you do that? And if you dont know how to do it, is it voluntary or involuntary? Lets consider breathing. You can feel that you breath deliberately; you dont control your breath. But when you dont think about it, it goes on. Is it voluntary or involuntary? So, we come to have a very arbitrary definition of self. That much of my activity which I feel I do. And that then doesnt include breathing most of the time; it doesnt include the heartbeats; it doesnt include the activity of the glands; it doesnt include digestion; it doesnt include how you shape your bones; circulate your blood. Do you or do you not do these things? Now if you get with yourself and you find out you are all of yourself, a very strange thing happens. You find out that your body knows that you are one with the universe. In other words, the so-called involuntary circulation of your blood is one continuous process with the stars shining. If you find out its YOU who circulates your blood, you will at the same moment find out that you are shining the sun. Because your physical organism is one continous process with everything else thats going on. Just as the waves are continuous with the ocean. Your body is continuous with the total energy system of the cosmos, and its all you. Only youre playing the game that youre only this bit of it. But as I tried to explain, there are in physical reality no such thing as separate events. So then. Remember also when I tried to work towards a definition of omnipotence. Omnipotence is not knowing how everything is done; its just doing it. You dont have to translate it into language. Supposing that when you got up in the morning, you had to switch your brain on. And you had to think and do as a deliberate process waking up all the circuits that you need for active life during hte day. Why, youd never get done! Because you have to do all those things at once. Thats why the Buddhists and Hindus represent their gods as many-armed. How could you use so many arms at once? How could a centipede control a hundred legs at once? Because it doesnt think about it. In the same way, you are unconsciously performing all the various activities of your organism. Only unconsciously isnt a good word, because it sounds sort of dead. Superconsciously would be better. Give it a plus rather than a minus. Because what consciousness is is a rather specialized form of awareness. When you look around the room, you are conscious of as much as you can notice, and you see an enormous number of things which you do not notice. For example, I look at a girl here and somebody asks me later What was she wearing?I may not know, although Ive seen, because I didnt attend. But I was aware. You see? And perhaps if I could under hypnosis be asked this question, where I would get my conscious attention out of the way by being in the hypnotic state, I could recall what dress she was wearing. So then, just in the same way as you dont know--you dont focus your attention--on how you make your thyroid gland function, so in the same way, you dont have any attention focused on how you shine the sun. So then, let me connect this with the problem of birth and death, which puzzles people enormously of course. Because, in order to understand what the self is, you have to remember that it doesnt need to remember anything,just as you dont need to know how you work your thyroid gland. So then, when you die, youre not going to have to put up with everlasting non-existance, because thats not an experience. A lot of people are afraid that when they die, theyre going to be locked up in a dark room forever, and sort of undergo that. But one of the interesting things in the world is--this is a yoga, this is a realization--try and imagine what it will be like to go to sleep and never wake up. Think about that. Children think about it. Its one of the great wonders of life. What will it be like to go to sleep and never wake up? And if you think long enough about that, something will happen to you. You will find out, among other things, it will pose the next question to you. What was it like to wake up after having never gone to sleep? That was when you were born. You see, you cant have an experience of nothing; nature abhorres a vacuum. So after youre dead, the only thing that can happen is the same experience, or the same sort of experience as when you were born. In other words, we all know very well that after other people die, other people are born. And theyre all you, only you can only experience it one at a time. Everybody is I, you all know youre you, and wheresoever all being exist throughout all galaxies, it doesnt make any difference. You are all of them. And when they come into being, thats you coming into being. You know that very well, only you dont have to remember the past in the same way you dont have to think about how you work your thyroid gland, or whatever else it is in your organism. You dont have to know how to shine the sun. You just do it, like you breath. Doesnt it really astonish you that you are this fantastically complex thing, and that youre doing all this and you never had any education in how to do it? Never learned, but youre this miracle? The point of it is, from a strictly physical, scientific standpoint, this organism is a continuous energy with everything else thats going on. And if I am my foot, I am the sun. Only weve got this little partial view. Weve got the idea that No, Im something IN this body.The ego. Thats a joke. The ego is nothing other than the focus of conscious attention. Its like the radar on a ship. The radar on a ship is a troubleshooter. Is there anything in the way? And conscious attention is a designed function of the brain to scan the environment, like a radar does, and note for any troublemaking changes. But if you identify yourself with your troubleshooter, then naturally you define yourself as being in a perpetual state of anxiety. And the moment we cease to identify with the ego and become aware that we are the whole organism, we realize first thing how harmonious it all is. Because your organism is a miracle of harmony. All these things functioning together. Even those creatures that are fighting each other in the blood stream and eating each other up. If they werent doing that, you wouldnt be healthy. So what is discord at one level of your being is harmony at another level. And you begin to realize that, and you begin to be aware too, that the discords of your life and the discords of peoples lives, which are a discord at one level, at a higher level of the universe are healthy and harmonious. And you suddenly realize that everything you are and do is at that level as magnificent and as free of any blemish as the patterns in waves. The markings in marble. The way a cat moves. And that this world is really OK. Cant be anything else, because otherwise it couldnt exist. And I dont mean this in a kind of Pollyanna Christian Science sense. I dont know what it is or why it is about Christian Science, but its prissy. Its got kind of a funny feeling to it; came from New England. But the reality underneath physical existence, or which really is physical existence--because in my philosophy there is no difference between the physical and the spiritual. These are absolutely out-of-date catagories. Its all process; it isnt stuffon the one hand and formon the other. Its just pattern-- life is pattern. It is a dance of energy. And so I will never invoke spooky knowledge. That is, that Ive had a private revelation or that I have sensory vibrations going on a plane which you dont have. Everything is standing right out in the open, its just a question of how you look at it. So you do discover when you realize this, the most extraordinary thing that I never cease to be flabbergasted at whenever it happens to me. Some people will use a symbolism of the relationship of God to the universe, wherein God is a brilliant light, only somehow veiled, hiding underneath all these forms as you look around you. So far so good. But the truth is funnier than that. It is that you are looking right at the brilliant light now that the experience you are having that you call ordinary everyday consciousness--pretending youre not it--that experience is exactly the same thing as it.Theres no difference at all. And when you find that out, you laugh yourself silly. Thats the great discovery. In other words, when you really start to see things, and you look at an old paper cup, and you go into the nature of what it is to see what vision is, or what smell is, or what touch is, you realize that that vision of the paper cup is the brilliant light of the cosmos. Nothing could be brighter. Ten thousand suns couldnt be brighter. Only theyre hidden in the sense that all the points of the infinite light are so tiny when you see them in the cup they dont blow your eyes out. See, the source of all light is in the eye. If there were no eyes in this world, the sun would not be light. So if I hit as hard as I can on a drum which has no skin, it makes no noise. So if a sun shines on a world with no eyes, its like a hand beating on a skinless drum. No light. YOU evoke light out of the universe, in the same way you, by nature of having a soft skin, evoke hardness out of wood. Wood is only hard in relation to a soft skin. Its your eardrum that evokes noise out of the air. You, by being this organism, call into being this whole universe of light and color and hardness and heaviness and everything. But in the mythology that we sold ourselves on at the end of the 19th century, when people discovered how big the universe was, and that we live on a little planet in a solar system on the edge of the galaxy, which is a minor galaxy, everybody thought, Uuuuugh, were really unimportant after all. God isnt there and doesnt love us, and nature doesnt give a damn.And we put ourselves down. But actually, its this funny little microbe, tiny thing, crawling on this little planet thats way out somewhere, who has the ingenuity, by nature of this magnificent organic structure, to evoke the whole universe out of what otherwise would be mere quanta. Theres jazz going on. But you see, this ingenious little organism is not merely some stranger in this. This little organism, on this little planet, is what the whole show is growing there, and so realizing its own presence. Does it through you, and youre it. When you put a chickens beak on a chalk line, it gets stuck; its hypnotized. So in the same way, when you learn to pay attention, and as children you know how all the teachers were in class: Pay attention!!And all the kids stare at the teacher. And weve got to pay attention. Thats putting your nose on the chalk line. And you got stuck with the idea of attention, and you thought attention was Me, the ego, attention. So if you start attending to attention, you realize what the hoax is. Thats why in Aldous Huxleys book Island,the Roger had trained the myna birds on the island to say Attention! Here and now, boys!See? Realize who you are. Come to, wake up! Well, heres the problem: if this is the state of affairs which is so, and if the conscious state youre in this moment is the same thing as what we might call the Divine State. If you do anything to make it different, it shows that you dont understand that its so. So the moment you start practicing yoga, or praying or meditating, or indulging in some sort of spiritual cultivation, you are getting in your own way. Now this is the Buddhist trick: the buddha said We suffer because we desire. If you can give up desire, you wont suffer.But he didnt say that as the last word; he said that as the opening step of a dialogue. Because if you say that to someone, theyre going to come back after a while and say Yes, but now Im desiring not to desire.And so the buddha will answer, Well at last youre beginning to understand the point.Because you cant give up desire. Why would you try to do that? Its already desire. So in the same way you say You ought to be unselfishor to give up you ego. Let go, relax. Why do you want to do that? Just because its another way of beating the game, isnt it? The moment you hypothesize that you are different from the universe, you want to get one up on it. But if you try to get one up on the universe, and youre in competition with it, that means you dont understand you ARE it. You think theres a real difference between selfand other.But self,what you call yourself, and what you call otherare mutually necessary to each other like back and front. Theyre really one. But just as a magnet polarizes itself at north and south, but its all one magnet, so experience polarizes itself as self and other, but its all one. If you try to make the south pole defeat the north pole, or get the mastery of it, you show you dont know whats going on. So there are two ways of playing the game. The first way, which is the usual way, is that a guru or teacher who wants to get this across to somebody because he knows it himself, and when you know it youd like others to see it, too. So what he does is, he gets you into being ridiculous harder and more assiduously than usual. In other words, if you are in a contest with the universe, hes going to stir up that contest until it becomes ridiculous. And so he sets you such tasks as saying-- Now of course, in order to be a true person, you must give up yourself, be unselfish. So the lord steps down out of heaven and says The first and great commandment is `Thou shalt love the lord thy god.You must love me.Well thats a double-bind. You cant love on purpose. You cant be sincere purposely. Its like trying not to think of a green elephant while taking medicine. But if a person really tries to do it--and this is the way Christianity is rigged--you should be very sorry for your sins. And though everybody knows theyre not, but they think they ought to be, they go around trying to be penetant. Or trying to be humble. And they know the more assiduously they practice it, the phonier and phonier the whole thing gets. So in Zen Buddhism, exactly the same thing happens. The Zen master challenges you to be spontaneous. Show me the real you.One way they do this getting you to shout. Shout the word moo.And he says I want to hear YOU in that shout. I want to hear your whole being in it.And you yell your lungs out and he says Pfft. Thats no good. Thats just a fake shout. Now I want to hear absolutely the whole of your being, right from the heart of the universe, come through in this shout.And these guys scream themselves hoarse. Nothing happens. Until one day they get so desperate they give up trying and they manage to get that shout through, when they werent trying to be genuine. Because there was nothing else to do, you just had to yell. And so in this way--its called the technique of reductio ad absurdum. If you think you have a problem, and youre an ego and youre in difficulty, the answer the Zen master makes to you is Show me your ego. I want to see this thing that has a problem.When Bodidharma, the legendary founder of Zen, came to China, a disciple came to him and said I have no peace of mind. Please pacify my mind.And Bodhidharma said Bring out your mind here before me and Ill pacify it.Well,he said, when I look for it, I cant find it.So Bodhidharma said There, its pacified.See? Becuase when you look for your own mind, that is to say, your own particularized center of being which is separate from everything else, you wont be able to find it. But the only way youll know it isnt there is if you look for it hard enough, to find out that it isnt there. And so everybody says All right, know yourself, look within, find out who you are.Because the harder you look, you wont be able to find it, and then youll realize it isnt there at all. There isnt a separate you. Youre mind is what there is. Everything. But the only way to find that out is to persist in the state of delusion as hard as possible. Thats one way. I havent said the only way, but it is one way. So almost all spiritual disciplines, meditations, prayers, etc, etc, are ways of persisting in folly. Doing resolutely and consistently what youre doing already. So if a person believes that the Earth is flat, you cant talk him out of that. He knows its flat. Look out the window and see; its obvious, it looks flat. So the only way to convince him it isnt is to say Well lets go and find the edge.And in order to find the edge, youve got to be very careful not to walk in circles, youll never find it that way. So weve got to go consistently in a straight line due west along the same line of latitude, and eventually when we get back to where we started from, youve convinced the guy that the world is round. Thats the only way that will teach him. Because people cant be talked out of illusions.   There is another possibility, however. But this is more difficult to describe. Lets say we take as the basic supposition- -which is the thing that one sees in the experience of satori or awakening, or whatever you want to call it--that this now moment in which Im talking and youre listening, is eternity. That although we have somehow conned ourselves into the notion that this moment is ordinary, and that we may not feel very well, were sort of vaguely frustrated and worried and so on, and that it ought to be changed. This is it. So you dont need to do anything at all. But the difficulty about explaining that is that you mustnt try and not do anything, because thats doing something. Its just the way it is. In other words, whats required is a sort of act of super relaxation; its not ordinary relaxation. Its not just letting go, as when you lie down on the floor and imagine that youre heavy so you get into a state of muscular relaxation. Its not like that. Its being with yourself as you are without altering anything. And how to explain that? Because theres nothing to explain. It is the way it is now. See? And if you understand that, it will automatically wake you up. So thats why Zen teachers use shock treatment, to sometimes hit them or shout at them or create a sudden surprise. Because is is that jolt that suddenly brings you here. See, theres no road to here, because youre already there. If you ask me How am I going to get here?It will be like the famous story of the American tourist in England. The tourist asked some yokel the way to Upper Tuttenham, a little village. And the yokel scratched his head and he said Well, sir, I dont know where it is, but if I were you, I wouldnt start from here.So you see, when you ask How to I obtain the knowledge of God, how do I obtain the knowledge of liberation?all I can say is its the wrong question. Why do you want to obtain it? Because the very fact that youre wanting to obtain it is the only thing that prevents you from getting there. You already have it. But of course, its up to you. Its your privilege to pretend that you dont. Thats your game; thats your life game; thats what makes you think your an ego. And when you want to wake up, you will, just like that. If youre not awake, it shows you dont want to. Youre still playing the hide part of the game. Youre still, as it were, the self pretending its not the self. And thats what you want to do. So you see, in that way, too, youre already there.   So when you understand this, a funny thing happens, and some people misinterpret it. Youll discover as this happens that the distinction between voluntary and involuntary behavior disappears. You will realize that what you describe as things under your own will feel exactly the same as things going on outside you. You watch other people moving, and you know youre doing that, just like youre breathing or circulating your blood. And if you dont understand whats going on, youre liable to get crazy at this point, and to feel that you are god in the Jehovah sense. To say that you actually have power over other people, so that you can alter what youre doing. And that youre omnipotent in a very crude, literal kind of bible sense. You see? A lot of people feel that and they go crazy. They put them away. They think theyre Jesus Christ and that everybody ought to fall down and worship them. Thats only they got their wires crossed. This experience happened to them, but they dont know how to interpret it. So be careful of that. Jung calls it inflation. People who get the Holy Man syndrome, that I suddenly discover that I am the lord and that I am above good and evil and so on, and therefore I start giving myself airs and graces. But the point is, everybody else is, too. If you discover that you are that, then you ought to know that everybody else is. For example, lets see in other ways how you might realize this. Most people think when they open their eyes and look around, that what theyre seeing is outside. It seems, doesnt it, that you are behind your eyes, and that behind the eyes there is a blank you cant see at all. You turn around and theres something else in front of you. But behind the eyes there seems to be something that has no color. It isnt dark, is isnt light. It is there from a tactile standpoint; you can feel it with your fingers, but you cant get inside it. But what is that behind your eyes? Well actually, when you look out there and see all these people and things sitting around, thats how it feels inside your head. The color of this room is back here in the nervous system, where the optical nerves are at the back of the head. Its in there. Its what youre experiencing. What you see out here is a neurological experience. Now if that hits you, and you feel sensuously that thats so, you may feel therefore that the external world is all inside my skull. Youve got to correct that, with the thought that your skull is also in the external world. So you suddenly begin to feel Wow, what kind of situation is this? Its inside me, and Im inside it, and its inside me, and Im inside it.But thats the way it is. This is the what you could call transaction, rather than interaction between the individual and the world. Just like, for example, in buying and selling. There cannot be an act of buying unless there is simultaneously an act of selling, and vice versa. So the relationship between the environment and the organism is transactional. The environment grows the organism, and in turn the organism creates the environment. The organism turns the sun into light, but it requires there be an environment containing a sun for there to be an organism at all. And the answer to it simply is theyre all one process. It isnt that organisms by chance came into the world. This world is the sort of environment which grows organisms. It was that way from the beginning. The organisms may in time have arrived in the scene or out of the scene later than the beginning of the scene, but from the moment it went BANG! in the beginning, if thats the way it started, organisms like us are sitting here. Were involved in it. Look here, we take the propogation of an electric current. I can have an electric current running through a wire that goes all the way around the Earth. And here we have a power source, and here we have a switch. A positive pole, a negative pole. Now, before that switch closes, the current doesnt exactly behave like water in a pipe. There isnt current here, waiting, to jump the gap as soon as the switch is closed. The current doesnt even start until the switch is closed. It never starts unless the point of arrival is there. Now, itll take an interval for that current to get going in its circuit if its going all the way around the Earth. Its a long run. But the finishing point has to be closed before it will even start from the beginning. In a similar way, even though in the development of any physical system there may by billions of years between the creation of the most primitive form of energy and then the arrival of intelligent life, that billions of years is just the same things as the trip of that current around the wire. Takes a bit of time. But its already implied. It takes time for an acorn to turn into an oak, but the oak is already implied in the acorn. And so in any lump of rock floating about in space, there is implicit human intelligence. Sometime, somehow, somewhere. They all go together. So dont differentiate yourself and stand off and say I am a living organism in a world made of a lot of dead junk, rocks and stuff.It all goes together. Those rocks are just as much you as your fingernails. You need rocks. What are you going to stand on? What I think an awakening really involves is a re-examination of our common sense. Weve got all sorts of ideas built into us which seem unquestioned, obvious. And our speech reflects them; its commonest phrases. Face the facts.As if they were outside you. As if life were something they simply encountered as a foreigner. Face the facts.Our common sense has been rigged, you see? So that we feel strangers and aliens in this world, and this is terribly plausible, simply because this is what we are used to. Thats the only reason. But when you really start questioning this, say Is that the way I have to assume life is? I know everybody does, but does that make it true?It doesnt necessarily. It aint necessarily so. So then as you question this basic assumption that underlies our culture, you find you get a new kind of common sense. It becomes absolutely obvious to you that you are continuous with the universe. For example, people used to believe that planets were supported in the sky by being imbedded in crystal spheres, and everybody knew that. Why, you could see the crystal spheres there because you could look right through them. It was obviously made of crystal, and something had to keep them up there. And then when the astronomers suggested that there werent any crystal spheres, people got terrified, because then they thought the stars would fall down. Nowadays, it doesnt bother anybody. They thought, too, when they found out the Earth was spherical, people who lived in the antiguities would fall off, and that was scary. But then somebody sailed around the world, and we all got used to it, we travel around in jet planes and everything. We have no problem feeling that the Earth is globular. None whatever. We got used to it. So in the same way Einsteins relativity theories--the curvature of the propogation of light, the idea that time gets older as light moves away from a source, in other words, people looking at the world now on Mars, they would be seeing the state of the world a little earlier than we are now experiencing it. That began to bother people when Einstein started talking about that. But now were all used to it, and relativity and things like that are a matter of common sense today. Well, in a few years, it will be a matter of commons sense to many people that theyre one with the universe. Itll be so simple. And then maybe if that happens, we shall be in a position to handle our technology with more sense. With love instead of with hate for our environment.  Alan Watts at deoxy.org   This particular weekend seminar is devoted to Buddhism, and it should be said first that there is a sense in which Buddhism is Hinduism, stripped for export. Last week, when I discussed Hinduism, I discussed many things to do with the organization of Hindu society, because Hinduism is not merely what we call a religion, its a whole culture. Its a legal system, its a social system, its a system of etiquette, and it includes everything. It includes housing, it includes food, it includes art. Because the Hindus and many other ancient peoples do not make, as we do, a division between religion and everything else. Religion is not a department of life; it is something that enters into the whole of it. But you see, when a religion and a culture are inseperable, its very difficult to export a culture, because it comes into conflict with the established traditions, manners, and customs of other people.    So the question arises, what are the essentials of Hinduism that could be exported? And when you answer that, approximately youll get Buddhism. As I explained, the essential of Hinduism, the real, deep root, isnt any kind of doctrine, it isnt really any special kind of discipline, although of course disciplines are involved. The center of Hinduism is an experience called _maksha[?]_, liberation, in which, through the dissipation of the illusion that each man and each woman is a separate thing in a world consisting of nothing but a collection of separate things, you discover that you are, in a way, on one level an illusion, but on another level, you are what they call the self,the one self, which is all that there is. The universe is the game of the self, which plays hide and seek forever and ever. When it plays hide,it plays it so well, hides so cleverly, that it pretends to be all of us, and all things whatsoever, and we dont know it because its playing hide.But when it plays seek,it enters onto a path of yoga, and through following this path it wakes up, and the scales fall from ones eyes. Now, in just the same way, the center of Buddhism, the only really important thing about Buddhism is the experience which they call awakening.Buddha is a title, and not a proper name. It comes from a Sanskrit root, bheudh,and that sometimes means to know,but better, waking.And so you get from this root bodhih.That is the state of being awakened. And so buddha,the awakened one,the awakened person.And so there can of course in Buddhist ideas, be very many buddhas. The person called THE buddha is only one of myriads. Because they, like the Hindus, are quite sure that our world is only one among billions, and that buddhas come and go in all the worlds. But sometimes, you see, there comes into the world what you might call a big buddha.A very important one. And such a one is said to have been Guatama, the son of a prince living in northern India, in a part of the world we now call Nepal, living shortly after 600 BC. All dates in Indian history are vague, and so I never try to get you to remember any precise date, like 564, which some people think it was, but I give you a vague date--just after 600 BC is probably right.    Most of you, Im sure, know the story of his life. Is there anyone who doesnt, I mean roughly? Ok. So I wont bother too much with that. But the point is, that when, in India, a man was called a buddha, or THE buddha, this is a title of a very exalted nature. It is first of all necessary for a buddha to be human. He cant be any other kind of being, whether in the Hindu scale of beings hes above the human state or below it. He is superior to all gods, because according to Indian ideas, gods or angels--angels are probably a better name for them than gods--all those exalted beings are still in the wheel of becoming, still in the chains of karma--that is action that requires more action to complete it, and goes on requiring the need for more action. Theyre still, according to popular ideas, going round the wheel from life after life after life after life, because they still have the thirst for existence, or to put it in a Hindu way: in them, the self is still playing the game of not being itself.    But the buddhas doctrine, based on his own experience of awakening, which occured after seven years of attempts to study with the various yogis of the time, all of whom used the method of extreme asceticism, fasting, doing all sort of exercises, lying on beds of nails, sleeping on broken rocks, any kind of thing to break down egocentricity, to become unselfish, to become detached, to exterminate desire for life. But buddha found that all that was futile; that was not The Way. And one day he broke is ascetic discipline and accepted a bowl of some kind of milk soup from a girl who was looking after cattle. And suddenly in this tremendous relaxation, he went and sat down under a tree, and the burden lifted. He saw, completely, that what he had been doing was on the wrong track. You cant make a silk purse out of a sows ear. And no amount of effort will make a person who believes himself to be an ego be really unselfish. So long as you think, and feel, that you are a someone contained in your bag of skin, and thats all, there is no way whatsoever of your behaving unselfishly. Oh yes, you can imitate unselfishness. You can go through all sorts of highly refined forms of selfishness, but youre still tied to the wheel of becoming by the golden chains of your good deeds, as the obviously bad people are tied to it by the iron chains of their misbehaviors.    So, you know how people are when they get spiritually proud. They belong to some kind of a church group, or an occult group, and say Of course were the ones who have the right teaching. Were the in-group, were the elect, and everyone else outside.It is really off the track. But then comes along someone who one-ups THEM, by saying Well, in our circles, were very tolerant. We accept all religions and all ways as leading to The One.But what theyre doing is theyre playing the game called Were More Tolerant Than You Are.And in this way the egocentric being is always in his own trap. So buddha saw that all his yoga exercises and ascetic disciplines had just been ways of trying to get himself out of the trap in order to save his own skin, in order to find peace for himself. And he realized that that is an impossible thing to do, because the motivation ruins the project. He found out, then, see, that there was no trap to get out of except himself. Trap and trapped are one, and when you understand that, there isnt any trap left. [Dharma Bums note: this made me think of a bit from an Anglican hymn: We, by enemies distrest,/They in paradise at rest;/We the captives, they the freed,/We and they are one indeed.] Im going to explain that of course more carefully.    So, as a result of this experience, he formulated what is called the _dharma_, that is the Sanskrit word for method.You will get a certain confusion when you read books on Buddhism, because they switch between Sanskrit and Pali words. The earliest Buddhist scriptures that we know of are written the Pali language, and Pali is a softened form of Sanskrit. So that, for example, the doctrine of the buddha is called in Sanskrit the dharma,we must in pronouncing Sanskrit be aware that an Ais almost pronounced as we pronounce Uin the word but.So they dont say darmuh,they say durmuh.And so also this double Dyou say budduhand so on. But in Pali, and in many books of Buddhism, youll find the Buddhist doctrine described as the dhama.And so the same way karmain Sanskrit, in Pali becomes kama.Buddharemains the same. The dharma, then, is the method.    Now, the method of Buddhism, and this is absolutely important to remember, is dialectic. That is to say, it doesnt teach a doctrine. You cannot anywhere what Buddhism teaches, as you can find out what Christianity or Judaism or Islam teaches. Because all Buddhism is a discourse, and what most people suppose to be its teachings are only the opening stages of the dialog.    So the concern of the buddha as a young man--the problem he wanted to solve--was the problem of human suffering. And so he formulated his teaching in a very easy way to remember. All those Buddhist scriptures are full of what you might call mnemonic tricks, sort of numbering things in such a way that theyre easy to remember. And so he summed up his teaching in what are called the Four Noble Truths. And the first one, because it was his main concern, was the truth about _duhkha_. Duhkha, suffering, pain, frustration, chronic dis-ease.It is the opposite of _sukha_, which means sweet, pleasure, etc.   So, insofar as the problem posed in Buddhism is duhkha, I dont want to suffer, and I want to find someone or something that can cure me of suffering.Thats the problem. Now if theres a person who solves the problem, a buddha, people come to him and say Master, how do we get out of this problem?So what he does is to propose certain things to them. First of all, he points out that with duhkha go two other things. These are respectively called _anitya_ and _anatman_. Anitya means--nityameans permanant,so impermanance.Flux, change, is characteristic of everything whatsoever. There isnt anything at all in the whole world, in the material world, in the psychic world, in the spiritual world, there is nothing you can catch hold of and hang on to for safely. Nuttin. Not only is there nothing you can hang on to, but by the teaching of anatman, there is no you to hang on to it. In other words, all clinging to life is an illusory hand grasping at smoke. If you can get that into your head and see that that is so, nobody needs to tell you that you ought not to grasp. Because you see, you cant.    See, Buddhism is not essentially moralistic. The moralist is the person who tells people that they ought to be unselfish, when they still feel like egos, and his efforts are always and invariably futile. Because what happens is he simply sweeps the dust under the carpet, and it all comes back again somehow. But in this case, it involves a complete realization that this is the case. So thats what the teacher puts across to begin with.    The next thing that comes up, the second of the noble truths, is about the cause of suffering, and this in Sanskrit is called _trishna_. Trishna is related to our word thirst.Its very often translated desire.That will do. Better, perhaps, is craving, clinging, grasping,or even, to use our modern psychological word, blocking.When, for example, somebody is blocked, and dithers and hesitates, and doesnt know what to do, he is in the strictest Buddhist sense attached, hes stuck. But a buddha cant be stuck, he cannot be phased. He always flows, just as water always flows, even if you dam it, the water just keeps on getting higher and higher and higher until it flows over the dam. Its unstoppable.    Now, buddha said, then, duhkha comes from trishna. You all suffer because you cling to the world, and you dont recognize that the world is anitya and anatman. So then, try, if you can, not to grasp. Well, do you see that that immediately poses a problem? Because the student who has started off this dialog with the buddha then makes various efforts to give up desire. Upon which he very rapidly discovers that he is desiring not to desire, and he takes that back to the teacher, who says Well, well, well.He said, Of course. You are desiring not to desire, and thats of course excessive. All I want you to do is to give up desiring as much as you can. Dont want to go beyond the point of which youre capable.And for this reason Buddhism is called the Middle Way. Not only is it the middle way between the extremes of ascetic discipline and pleasure seeking, but its also the middle way in a very subtle sense. Dont desire to give up more desire than you can. And if you find that a problem, dont desire to be successful in giving up more desire than you can. You see whats happening? Every time hes returned to the middle way, hes moved out of an extreme situation.    Now then, well go on; well cut out what happens in the pursuit of that method until a little later. The next truth in the list is concerned with the nature of release from duhkha. And so number three is _nirvana_. Nirvana is the goal of Buddhism; its the state of liberation corresponding to what the Hindus call _moksha_. The word means blow out,and it comes from the root nir vritti.Now some people think that what it means is blowing out the flame of desire. I dont believe this. I believe that it means breathe out,rather than blow out,because if you try to hold your breath, and in Indian thought, breath--prana--is the life principle. If you try to hold on to life, you lose it. You cant hold your breath and stay alive; it becomes extremely uncomfortable to hold onto your breath.    And so in exactly the same way, it becomes extremely uncomfortable to spend all your time holding on to your life. What the devil is the point of surviving, going on living, when its a drag? But you see, thats what people do. They spend enormous efforts on maintaining a certain standard of living, which is a great deal of trouble. You know, you get a nice house in the suburbs, and the first thing you do is you plant a lawn. Youve gotta get out and mow the damn thing all the time, and you buy expensive this-that and soon youre all involved in mortgages, and instead of being able to walk out into the garden and enjoy, you sit at your desk and look at your books, filling out this and that and the other and paying bills and answering letters. What a lot of rot! But you see, that is holding onto life. So, translated into colloquial American, nirvana is whew!Cause if you let your breath go, itll come back. So nirvana is not annihilation, its not disappearance into a sort of undifferentiated void. Nirvana is the state of being let go. It is a state of consciousness, and a state of--you might call it-- being, here and now in this life.    We now come to the most complicated of all, number four: _margha[?]_. Marghin Sanskrit means past,and the buddha taught an eightfold path for the realization of nirvana. This always reminds me of a story about Dr Suzuki, who is a very, very great Buddhist scholar. Many years ago, he was giving a fundamental lecture on Buddhism at the University of Hawaii, and hed been going through these four truths, and he said Ah, fourth Noble Truth is Noble Eightfold Path. First step of Noble Eightfold Path called _sho-ken_. Sho-ken in Japanese mean `right view.For Buddhism, fundamentally, is right view. Right way of viewing this world. Second step of Noble Eightfold Path is--oh, I forget second step, you look it up in the book.   Well, Im going to do rather the same thing. What is important is this: the eightfold path has really got three divisions in it. The first are concerned with understanding, the second division is concerned with conduct, and the third division is concerned with meditation. And every step in the path is preceded with the Sanskrit word _samyak_. In which you remember we ran into _samadhi_ last week, samis the key word. And so, the first step, _samyak- drishti_, which mean--drishtimeans a view, a way of looking at things, a vision, an attitude, something like that. But this word samyak is in ordinary texts on Buddhism almost invariably translated right.This is a very bad translation. The word IS used in certain contexts in Sanskrit to mean right, correct,but it has other and wider meanings. Sammeans, like our word sum,which is derived from it, complete, total, all-embracing.It also has the meaning of middle wade,representing as it were the fulcrum, the center, the point of balance in a totality. Middle wade way of looking at things. Middle wade way of understanding the dharma. Middle wade way of speech, of conduct, of livelihood, and so on.    Now this is particularly cogent when it comes to Buddhist ideas of behavior. Every Buddhist in all the world, practically, as a layman--hes not a monk--undertakes what are called _pantasila[?]_, the Five Good Conducts. Silais sometimes translated precept.But its not a precept because its not a commandment. When Buddhists priests chant the precepts, you know: pranatipada[?]: prana (life) tipada (taking away) I promise to abstain from.So the first is that one undertakes not to destroy life. Second, not to take what is not given. Third--this is usually translated not to commit adultry. It doesnt say anything of the kind. In Sanskrit, it means I undertake the precept to abstain from exploiting my passions.Buddhism has no doctrine about adultry; you may have as many wives as you like.    But the point is this: when youre feeling blue and bored, its not a good idea to have a drink, because you may become dependant on alcohol whenever you feel unhappy. So in the same way, when youre feeling blue and bored, its not a good idea to say Lets go out and get some chicks.Thats exploiting the passions. But its not exploiting the passions, you see, when drinking, say expresses the viviality and friendship of the group sitting around the dinner table, or when sex expresses the spontaneous delight of two people in each other.    Then, the fourth precept, _musavada[?]_, to abstain from false speech.It doesnt simply mean lying. It means abusing people. It means using speech in a phony way, like saying all niggers are thus and so.Or the attitude of America to this situation is thus and thus.See, thats phony kind of talking. Anybody who studies general semantics will be helped in avoiding musavada, false speech.    The final precept is a very complicated one, and nobodys quite sure exactly what it means. It mentions three kinds of drugs and drinks: sura, mariya[?], maja[?]. We dont know what they are. But at any rate, its generally classed as narcotics and liquors. Now, there are two ways of translating this precept. One says to abstain from narcotics and liquors; the other liberal translation favored by the great scholar Dr [?] is I abstain from being intoxicated by these things.So if you drink and dont get intoxicated, its ok. You dont have to be a teatotaler to be a Buddhist. This is especially true in Japan and China; my goodness, how they throw it down! A scholarly Chinese once said to me, You know, before you start meditating, just have a couple martinis, because it increases your progress by about six months.Now you see these are, as I say, they are not commandments, they are vows. Buddhism has in it no idea of there being a moral law laid down by somekind of cosmic lawgiver. The reason why these precepts are undertaken is not for a sentimental reason. It is not that youre going to make you into a good person. It is that for anybody interested in the experiments necessary for liberation, these ways of life are expedient. First of all, if you go around killing, youre going to make enemies, and youre going to have to spend a lot of time defending yourself, which will distract you from your yoga. If you go around stealing, likewise, youre going to aquire a heap of stuff, and again, youre going to make enemies. If you exploit your passions, youre going to get a big thrill, but it doesnt last. When you begin to get older, you realize Well that was fun while we had it, but I havent really learned very much from it, and now what?Same with speech. Nothing is more confusing to the mind than taking words too seriously. Weve seen so many examples of that. And finally, to get intoxicated or narcotized--a narcotic is anything like alcohol or opium which makes you sleepy. The word narcosisin Greek, narcmeans sleep.So, if you want to pass your life seeing things through a dim haze, this is not exactly awakening. So, so much for the conduct side of Buddhism. We come then to the final parts of the eightfold path. There are two concluding steps, which are called _samyak-smriti_ and _samyak-samadhi_. _Smriti_ means recollection, memory, present-mindedness.Seems rather funny that the same word can mean recollection or memoryand present-mindedness.But smriti is exactly what that wonderful old rascal Gurdjieff meant by self-awareness,or self- remembering.Smriti is to have complete presence of mind. There is a wonderful meditation called The House that Jack Built Meditation,at least thats what I call it, that the Southern Buddhists practice. He walks, and he says to himself, There is the lifting of the foot.The next thing he says is There is a perception of the lifting of the foot.And the next, he says There is a tendency towards the perception of the feeling of the lifting of the foot.Then finally he says, There is a consciousness of the tendency of the perception of the feeling of the lifting of the foot.And so, with everything that he does, he knows that he does it. He is self-aware. This is tricky. Of course, its not easy to do. But as you practice this--Im going to let the cat out of the bag, which I suppose I shouldnt do--but you will find that there are so many things to be aware of at any given moment in what youre doing, that at best you only ever pick out one or two of them. Thats the first thing youll find out. Ordinary conscious awareness is seeing the world with blinkers on. As we say, you can think of only one thing at a time. Thats because ordinary consciousness is narrowed consciousness. Its being narrow-minded in the true sense of the word, looking at things that way. Then you find out in the course of going around being aware all of the time--what are you doing when you remember? Or when you think about the future? I am aware that I am remembering? I am aware that I am thinking about the future?    But you see, what eventually happens is that you discover that there isnt any way of being absent-minded. All thoughts are in the present and of the present. And when you discover that, you approach samadhi. Samadhi is the complete state, the fulfilled state of mind. And you will find many, many different ideas among the sects of Buddhists and Hindus as to what samadhi is. Some people call it a trance, some people call it a state of consciousness without anything in it, knowing with no object of knowledge. All these are varying opinions. I had a friend who was a Zen master, and he used to talk about samadhi, and he said a very fine example of samadhi is a fine horserider. When you watch a good cowboy, he is one being with the horse. So an excellent driver in a car makes the car his own body, and he absolutely is with it. So also a fine pair of dancers. They dont have to shove each other to get one to do what the other wants him to do. They have a way of understanding each other, of moving together as if they were siamese twins. Thats samadhi, on the physical, ordinary, everyday level. The samadhi of which buddha speaks is the state which, as it is, the gateway to nirvana, the state in which the illusion of the ego as a separate thing disintegrates.    Now, when we get to that point in Buddhism, Buddhists do a funny thing, which is going to occupy our attention for a good deal of this seminar. They dont fall down and worship. They dont really have any name for what it is that is, really and basically. The idea of anatman, of non-self, is applied in Buddhism not only to the individual ego, but also to the notion that there is a self of the universe, a kind of impersonal or personal god, and so it is generally supposed that Buddhism is generally atheistic. Its true, depending on what you mean by atheism. Common or garden atheism is a form of belief, namely that I believe there is no god--and Hans Enkel[?] is its prophet. (Im speaking of a famous atheist). The atheist positively denies the existence of any god. All right. Now, there is such an atheist, if you put dash between the aand theist,or speak about something called atheos--theosin Greek means god--but what is a non-god? A non-god is an inconceivable something or other.    I love the story about a debate in the Houses of Parliment in England, where, as you know, the Church of England is established and under control of the government, and the high eclesiastics had petitioned Parliment to let them have a new prayerbook. Somebody got up and said Its perfectly ridiculous that Parliment should decide on this, because as we well know, there are quite a number of atheists in these benches.And somebody got up and said Oh, I dont think there are really any atheists. We all believe in some sort of something somewhere.   Now again, of course, it isnt that Buddhism believes in some sort of something somewhere, and that is to say in vagueness. Here is the point: if you believe, if you have certain propositions that you want to assert about the ultimate reality, or what Portilli[?] calls the ultimate ground of being,you are talking nonsense. Because you cant say something specific about everything. You see, supposing you wanted to say God has a shape.But if god is all that there is, then God doesnt have any outside, so he cant have a shape. You have to have an outside and space outside it to have a shape. So thats why the Hebrews, too, are against people making images of God. But nonetheless, Jews and Christians persistently make images of God, not necessarily in pictures and statues, but they make images in their minds. And those are much more insidious images.    Buddhism is not saying that the Self, the great atman, or whatnot, it isnt denying that the experience which corresponds to these words is realizable. What it is saying is that if you make conceptions and doctrines about these things, your liable to become attached to them. Youre liable to start believing instead of knowing. So they say in Zen Buddhism, The doctrine of Buddhism is a finger pointing at the moon. Do not mistake the finger for the moon.Or so we might say in the West, the idea of God is a finger pointing at God, but what most people do is instead of following the finger, they suck it for comfort. And so buddha chopped off the finger, and undermined all metaphysical beliefs. There are many, many dialogues in the Pali scriptures where people try to corner the buddha into a metaphysical position. Is the world eternal?The buddha says nothing. Is the world not eternal?And he answers nuttin. Is the world both eternal and not eternal?And he dont say nuttin. Is the world neither eternal nor not eternal?And STILL he dont say nuttin. He maintains what is called the noble silence. Sometimes called the thunder of silence, because this silence, this metaphysical silence, is not a void. It is very powerful. This silence is the open window through which you can see not concepts, not ideas, not beliefs, but the very goods. But if you say what it is that you see, you erect an image and an idol, and you misdirect people. Its better to destroy peoples beliefs than to give them beliefs. I know it hurts, but it is The Way.     You see, in Buddhism, the feeling that we have of an enduring organism--I meet you today and I see you, and then tomorrow I meet you again, and you look pretty much as you looked yesterday, and so I consider that youre the same person, but you arent. Not really. When I watch a whirlpool in a stream, heres the stream flowing along, and theres always a whirlpool like the one at Niagra. But that whirlpool never, never really holds any water. The water is all the time rushing through it. In the same way, a university, the University of California--what is it? The students exchange at least every four years; the faculty changes at a somewhat slower rate; the building changes, they knock down old ones and put up new ones; the administration changes. So what is the University of California? Its a pattern. A doing of a particular kind. And so in just precisely that way, every one of us is a whirlpool in the tide of existence, and where every cell in our body, every every molocule, every atom is in constant flux, and nothing can be pinned down. You know, you can put bands on pigeons, or migrating birds, and identify them and follow them, and find out where they go. But you cant tag atoms, much less electrons. They have a curious way of appearing and disappearing, and one of the great puzzles in physics is What are electons doing when were not looking at them? Because our observation of them has to modify their behavior. We cant see an electron without putting it in an experimental situation where our examination of it in some way changes it. What we would like to know is what it is doing when were not looking at it. Like does the light in the refrigerator really go off when we close the door?    But this is fundamental, you see, to Buddhistic philosophy. The philosophy of change. From one point of view, change is just too bad. Everything flows away, and theres a kind of sadness in that, a kind of nostalgia, and there may even be a rage. Go not gently into that good night, but rage, rage, at the dying of the light.   But theres something curious--there can be a very fundamental change in ones attitude to the question of the world as fading. On the one hand resentment, and on the other delight. If you resist change--of course, you must, to some extent. When you meet another person, you dont want to be thoroughly rejected, but you love to feel a little resistance. Dont you, you know? You have a beautiful girl, and you touch her. You dont want her to go Blah!But so round, so firm, so fully packed! A little bit of resistance, you see, is great. So there must always be resistance in change; otherwise there couldnt even be change. Thered just be a pfft!The world would go pfft!and thatd be the end of it.    But because theres always some resistance to change, there is a wonderful manifestation of form, there is a dance of life. But the human mind, as distinct from most animal minds, is terribly aware of time. And so we think a great deal about the future, and we know that every visible form is going to disappear and be replaced by so- called others. Are these others, others? Or are they the same forms returning? Of couse, thats a great puzzle. Are next years leaves that come from a tree going to be the same as this years leaves? What do you mean by the same? Theyll be the same shape, theyll have the same botanical characteristics. But youll be able to pick up a shriveled leaf from last autumn and say Look at the difference. This is last years leaf; this is this years leaf.And in that sense, theyre not the same.    What happens when any great musician plays a certain piece of music? He plays it today, and then he plays it again tomorrow. Is it the same piece of music, or is it another? In the Pali language, they say _naja-so, naja-ano[?]_ which means not the same, yet not another.So, in this way, the Buddhist is able to speak of reincarnation of beings, without having to believe in some kind of soul entity that is reincarnated. Some kind of atman, some kind of fixed self, ego principle, soul principle that moves from one life to another. And this is as true in our lives as they go on now from moment to moment as it would be true of our lives as they appear and reappear again over millions of years. It doesnt make the slightest difference, except that there are long intervals and short intervals, high vibrations and low vibrations. When you hear a high sound, high note in the musical scale, you cant see any holes in it--its going too fast--and it sounds completely continuous. But when you get the lowest audible notes that you can hear on an organ, you feel the shaking. You feel the vibration, you hear that music [throbbing] on and off.    So in the same way as we live now from day to day, we experience ourselves living at a high rate of vibration, and we appear to be continuous, although there is the rhythm of waking and sleeping. But the rhythym that runs from generation to generation and from life to life is much slower, and so we notice the gaps. We dont notice the gaps when the rhythym is fast. So we are living, as it were, on many, many levels of rhythym.    So this is the nature of change. If you resist it, you have duhkha, you have frustration and suffering. But on the other hand, if you understand change, you dont cling to it, and you let it flow, then its no problem. It becomes positively beautiful, which is why in poetry, the theme of the evernescence[?] of the world is beautiful. When Shelly says,  So in the same way, the coming and going of things in the world is marvelous. They go. Where do they go? Dont answer, because that would spoil the mystery. They vanish into the mystery. But if you try to persue them, you destroy yugen. Thats a very curious thing, but that idea of yugen, which in Chinese characters means, as it were, kind of the deep mystery of the valley.Theres a poem in Chinese which says The wind drops, but the petals keep falling. The bird calls, and the mountain becomes more mysterious.Isnt that strange? Theres no wind anymore, and yet petals are dropping. And a bird in the canyon cries, and that one sound in the mountains brings out the silence with a wallop.    I remember when I was almost a child in the Pyrenees in the southwest of France. We went way up in this gorgeous silence of the mountains, but in the distance we could hear the bells on the cows clanking. And somehow those tiny sounds brought out the silence. And so in the same way, slight permanances bring out change. And they give you this very strange sense. Yugen. The mystery of change. You know, in Elliots poem, The Four Quartets,where he says The dark, dark, dark. They all go into the dark, distinguished families, members of the book of the director of directors, everybody, they all go into the dark.Life IS life, you see, because, just because its always disappearing. Supposing suddenly, by some kind of diabolical magic, I could say zzzip!and every one of you would stay the same age forever. Youd be like Madam Trusseaus wax works. Itd be awful! In a thousand years from now, what beautiful hags you would be.    So, the trouble is, that we have one-sided minds, and we notice the wave of life when it is at its peak or crest. We dont notice it when its at the trough, not in the ordinary way. Its the peaks that count. Take a buzzsaw: what seems important to us is the tips of the teeth. They do the cutting, not the valleys between the teeth. But see, you couldnt have tips of teeth without the valleys between. Therefore the saw wouldnt cut without both tips and V- shaped valleys. But we ignore that. We dont notice the valleys so much as we notice the mountains. Valleys point down, mountains point up, and we prefer things that point up, because up is good and down is bad. But seriously, we dont blame the peaks for being high and the valleys for being low. But it is so, you see, that we ignore the valley aspect of things, and so all wisdom begins by emphasizing the valley aspect as distinct from the peak aspect. We pay plenty of attention to the peak aspect, thats what captures out attention, but we somehow screen out the valley aspect. But that makes us very uncomfortable. It seems we want and get pleasure from looking at the peaks, but actually this denies our pleasure, becuase secretly we know that every peak is followed by a valley. The valley of the shadow of death.    And were always afraid, because were not used to looking at valleys, because were not used to living with them, the represent to us the strange and threatening unknown. Maybe were afraid the principle of the valley will conquer, and the peaks will be overwhelmed. Maybe death is stronger than life, because life always seems to require an effort; death is something into which you slide effortlessly. Maybe nothing will overcome something in the end. Wouldnt that be awful? And so we resist change, ignorant of the fact that change is life, and that nothing is invariably the adverse face of something.    For such purposes, I have to give you a very elementary lesson about the properties of space. Because most people are afraid of space. They ignore it, and they think space is nothing. Space is simply, unless it happens to be filled with air, a nothingness between things. But without space, there is no energy and no motion, and it can be illustrated in this way: in this area is the whole universe, and theres only one thing in it, and thats a ball. Is it moving, or is it still? Theres absolutely no way of deciding. None whatever. So its neither moving, nor is it still, because you cant be aware of or measure motion, except in relation to something thats relatively still. All right, lets have two balls. Ball one, and ball two. Now, these balls--we suddenly notice that the distance between them increases. Which one moved? Or did they both move? theres no way of deciding. You could say the distance, ie, the space between them increased. But who started it is impossible to determine. All right, three balls. Now, we notice for example that one and three stay together, and they keep a constant distance apart. But two goes away and comes back. Now whats happening? One and three, since they stay together, constitute a group. Two recedes or approaches, or does it? Or is the group one and three receding from or approaching towards two? Theres one way of deciding. One and three constitute a majority. So if they vote, they can say whether they are going towards two or going away from two. Two doesnt like this. So two decides it can lick em by joining them, so two comes and sits here. Now whats going to happen? Neither one and three can say to two, and two cant say to three, Why do you keep following me around?Because again, because they all maintain a constant distance, they have no motion. All right. We have the same problem on a very big scale, in what we call the expansion of the universe. All the galaxies observable seem to be getting further away from each other. Now, are they going further away from us, or are we going further away from them, or are they all all together going further away from each other? Astronomers have suggested that what is expanding is the space between them. And so we get the idea of expanding space. This isnt quite the right answer. What has been neglected in all this, if I can say either that the objects are moving away from each other, theyre doing it. Or its equally possible for me to say that its the space theyre in thats expanding. But I cant decide which one is which. The meaning of this inability to decide is that space and solid are two ways of talking about the same thing. Space-solid. You dont find space without solids; you dont find solids without space. If I say theres a universe in which there isnt anything but space, you must say Space between what?Space is relationship, and it always goes together with solid, like back goes with front. But the devisive mind ignores space. And it thinks its the solids that do the whole job, that theyre the only thing thats real. That is, to put it in other words, conscious attention ignores intervals, because it thinks theyre unimportant. Lets consider music. When you hear music, most people think that what they hear is a succession of notes or tones. If all you heard when you listen to music were a succession of tones, you would hear no melody, and no harmony. You would hear nothing but a succession of noises. What you really hear when you hear melody is the interval between one tone and another. The steps as it were on the scale. If you cant hear that, youre tone-deaf and dont enjoy music at all. Its the interval thats the important thing. So in the same way, in the intervals between this years leaves, last years leaves, this generation of people and that generation, the interval is in some ways just as important, in some ways more important than what its between. Actually they go together, but I say the interval is sometimes more important because we underemphasize it, so Im going to overemphasize it as a correction. So space, night, death, darkness, not being there is an essential componant of being there. You dont have the one without the other, just as your buzzsaw has no teeth without having valleys between the tips of them. Thats the way being is made up. So then, in Buddhism, change is emphasized. First, to unsettle people who think that they can achieve permanance by hanging on to life. And it seems that the preacher is wagging his finger at them and saying Vanity of vanities, all is vanity.So all the preachers together say Dont cling to those things.So then, as a result of that, and now Im going to speak in strictly Buddhist terms, the follower of the way of buddha seeks deliverance from attachment to the world of change. He seeks nirvana, the state beyond change, which the buddha called the unborn, the unoriginated, the uncreated, and the unformed. But then, you see, what he finds out is in seeking a state beyond change, seeking nirvana as something away from _samsara_, which is the name for the wheel, he is still seeking something permanant. And so, as Buddhism went on, they thought about this a great deal. And this very point was the point of division between the two great schools of Buddhism, which in the south, as I explained, were Theravada, the doctrine of the Thera, the elders, sometimes known, disrespectfully, as the Hinayana. Yanameans a vehicle, a conveyance, or a ferryboat.This is a yana, and I live on a ferryboat because thats my job. Then there is the other school of Buddhism, called the Mahayana. Mahameans great; hina,little. The great vehicle and the little vehicle.    Now, what is this? The Mahayanas say Youre little just get a few people who are very, very tough ascetics, and takes them across the shore to nirvana.But the great vehicle shows people that nirvana is not different from everyday life. So that when you have reached nirvana, if you think Now I have attained it, now I have succeeded, now I have caught the secret of the universe, and I am at peace,you have only a false peace. You have become a stone buddha. You have a new illusion of the changeless. So it is said that such a person is a pratyeka-buddha. That means private buddha.Ive got it all for myself.And in contrast with this kind of pratyeka- buddha, who gains nirvana and stays there, the Mahayanas use the word _bodhisattva_. Sattvameans essential principle; bodhi,awakening. A person whose essential being is awakened. The word used to mean junior buddha,someone on the way to becoming a buddha. But in the course of time, it came to mean someone who had attained buddhahood, who had reached nirvana, but who returns into everyday life to deliver everyday beings. This is the popular idea of a bodhisattva--a savior.    So, in the popular Buddhism of Tibet and China and Japan, people worship the bodhisattvas, the great bodhisattvas, as saviors. Say, the one I talked about this morning, the hermaphroditic Quan-Yin[?]. People loved Quan-Yin because she--he/she, she/he--could be a buddha, but has come back into the world to save all beings. The Japanese call he/she _Kanon[?]_, and they have in Kyoto an image of Kanon with one thousand arms, radiating like an aureole all around this great golden figure, and these thousand arms are one thousand different ways of rescuing beings from ignorance. Kanon is a funny thing. I remember one night when I suddenly realized that Kanon was incarnate in the whole city of Kyoto, that this whole city was Kanon, that the police department, the taxi drivers, the fire department, the shopkeepers, in so far as this whole city was a collaborate effort to sustain human life, however bumbling, however inefficient, however corrupt, it was still a manifestation of Kanon, with its thousand arms, all working independantly, and yet as one.   So they revere those bodhisattvas as the saviors, come back into the world to deliver all beings. But there is a more esoteric interpretation of this. The bodhisattva returns into the world. That means he has discovered that you dont have to go anywhere to find nirvana. Nirvana is where you are, provided you dont object to it. In other words, change--and everything is change; nothing can be held on to--to the degree that you go with a stream, you see, you are are still, you are flowing with it. But to the degree you resist the stream, then you notice that the current is rushing past you and fighting you. So swim with it, go with it, and youre there. Youre at rest. And this is of course particularly true when it comes to those moments when life really seems to be going to take us away, and the stream of change is going to swallow us completely. The moment of death, and we think, Oh-oh, this is it. This is the end.And so at death we withdraw, say No, no, no, not that, not yet, please.   But, actually, the whole problem is that there really is no other problem for human beings, than to go over that waterfall when it comes. Just as you go over any other waterfall, just as you go on from day-to-day, just as you go to sleep at night. Be absolutely willing to die. Now, Im not preaching. Im not saying you OUGHT to be willing to die, and that you should muscle up your courage and somehow put on a good front when the terrible thing comes. Thats not the idea at all. The point is that you can only die well if you understand this system of ways. If you understand that youre disappearance as the form in which you think you are you. Your disappearance as this particular organism is simply seasonal. That you are just as much the dark space beyond death as you are the light interval called life. These are just two sides of you, because YOU is the total way. You see, we cant have half a way. Nobody ever saw waves that just had crests, and no troughs. So you cant have half a human being, who is born but doesnt die. Half a thing. That would be only half a thing. But the propogation of vibrations, and life is vibration, it simply goes on an on, but its cycles are short cycles and long cycles. Space, you see, is not just nothing. If I could magnify my hand to an enormous degree so you could see all the molocules in it, I dont know how far apart they would be, but it seems to me they would be something like tennis balls in a very, very large space, and youd look when I move my hand, and say For gods sake, look at all those tennis balls, theyre all going together. Crazy. And there are no strings tying them together. Isnt that queer?No, but theres space going with them, and space is a function of, or its an inseparable aspect of whatever solids are in the space. That is the clue, probably, to what we mean by gravity. We dont know yet. So in the same way, when those marvelous sandpipers come around here, the little ones. While theyre in the air flying, they have one mind, they move all together. When they alight on the mud, they become individuals and they go pecking around for worms or whatever. But one click of the fingers and all those things go up into the air. They dont seem to have a leader, because they dont follow when they turn; they all turn together and go off in a different direction. Its amazing. But theyre like the molocules in my hand.    So then, you see, heres the principle: when you dont resist change, I mean over resist. I dont mean being flabby, like I said at the beginning. When you dont resist change, you see that the changing world, which disappears like smoke, is no different from the nirvana world. Nirvana, as I said, means breathe out, let go of the breath. So in the same way, dont resist change; its all the same principle.    So the bodhisattva saves all beings, not by preaching sermons to them, but by showing them that they are delivered, they are liberated, by the act of not being able to stop changing. You cant hang on to yourself. You dont have to try to not hang on to yourself. It cant be done, and that is salvation. Thats why you may think it a grisly habit, but certain monks keep skulls on their desks, momentomori,be mindful of death.Gurgdjieff says in one of his books that the most important thing for anyone to realize is that you and every person you see will soon be dead. It sounds so gloomy to us, because we have devised a culture fundamentally resisting death. There is a wonderful saying that Anandakuri- Swami[?] used to quote: I pray that death will not come and find me still unannihilated.In other words, that man dies happy if there is no one to die. In other words, if the egos disappeared before death caught up to him.    But you see, the knowledge of death helps the ego to disappear, because it tells you you cant hang on. So what we need, if were going to have a good religion around, thats one of the places where it can start: having, I suppose theyd call it The Institution For Creative Dying, something like that. You can have one department where you can have champaign and cocktail parties to die with, another department where you can have glorious religious rituals with priests and things like that, another department where you can have psychadelic drugs, another department where you can have special kinds of music, anything, you know. All these arrangements will be provided for in a hospital for delightful dying. But thats the thing, to go out with a bang instead of a whimper.     So, thats the initial standpoint, but, as soon as you really discover this, and you stop clinging to change, then everything is quite different. It becomes amazing. Not only do all your senses become more wide awake, not only do you feel almost as if youre walking on air, but you see, finally, that there is no duality, no difference between the ordinary world and the nirvana world. Theyre the same world, but what makes the difference is the point of view. And of course, if you keep identifying yourself with some sort of stable entity that sits and watches the world go by, you dont acknowledge your union, your inseparatability from everything that there is. You go by with all the rest of the things, but if you insist on trying to take a permanant stand, on trying to be a permanant witness of the flux, then it grates against you, and you feel very uncomfortable. But it is a fundamental feeling in most of us that we are such witnesses. We feel that behind the stream of our thoughts, of our feelings, of our experiences, there is something which is the thinker, the feeler, and the experiencer. Not recognizing that that is itself a thought, feeling, or experiece, and it belongs within and not outside the changing panorama of experience. Its what you call a cue signal. In other words, when you telephone, and your telephone conversation is being tape recorded, its the law that there shall be a beep every so many seconds, and that beep cues you in to the fact that this conversation is recorded. So in a very similar way, in our everyday experience theres a beep which tells us this is a continuous experience which is mine. Beep! In the same way, for example, it is a cue signal when a composer arranges some music, and he keeps in it a recurrent theme, but he makes many variations on it. That, or more subtle still, he keeps within it a consistent style, so you know that its Mozart all the way along, because that sounds like Mozart. But there isnt, as it were, a constant noise going all the way through to tell you its continuous, although, in Hindu music, they do have something called the drone. There is, behind all the drums and every kind of singing, and it always sounds the note which is the tonic of the scale being used. But in Hindu music, that drone represents the eternal self, the brahman, behind all the changing forms of nature. But thats only a symbol, and to find out what is eternal--you cant make an image of it; you cant hold on to it. And so its psychologically more condusive to liberation to remember that the thinker, or the feeler, or the experiencer, and the experiences are all together. Theyre all one. But, if out of anxiety, you try to stabilize, keep permanant, the separate observer, you are in for conflict.    Of course, the separate observer, the thinker of the thoughts, is an abstraction which we create out of memory. We think of the self, the ego, rather, as a repository of memories, a kind of safety deposit box, or record, or filing cabinet place where all our experiences are stored. Now, thats not a very good idea. Its more that memory is a dynamic system, not a storage system. Its a repitition of rhythyms, and these rhythyms are all part and parcel of the ongoing flow of present experience. In other words, first of all, how do you distinguish between something known now, and a memory? Actually, you dont know anything at all until you remember it. Because if something happens that is purely instantaneous--if a light flashes, or, to be more accurate, if there is a flash, lasting only one millionth of a second, you probably wouldnt experience it, because it wouldnt give you enough time to remember it. We say in customary speech, Well, it has to make an impression.So in a way, all present knowledge is memory, because you look at something, and for a while the rods and cones in your retina respond to that, and they do their stuff--jiggle, jiggle, jiggle--and so as you look at things, they set up a series of echoes in your brain. And these echoes keep reverberating, because the brain is very complicated. But you then see--first of all, everything you know is remembered, but there is a way in which we distinguish between seeing somebody here now, and the memory of having seen somebody else whos not here now, but whom you did see in the past, and you know perfectly well, when you remember that other persons face, its not an experience of the person being here. How is this? Because memory signals have a different cue attached to them than present time signals. They come on a different kind of vibration. Sometimes, however, the wiring gets mixed up, and present experiences come to us with a memory cue attached to them, and then we have what is called a _deja vu_ experience: were quite sure weve experienced this thing before.    But the problem that we dont see, dont ordinarily recognize, is that although memory is a series of signals with a special kind of cue attached to them so we dont confuse them with present experience, they are actually all part of the same thing as present experience, they are all part of this constantly flowing life process, and there is no separate witness standing aside from the process, watching it go by. Youre all involved in it.    Now, accepting that, you see, going with that, although at first it sounds like the knell of doom, is if you dont clutch it anymore, splended. Thats why I said death should be occasion for a great celebration, that people should say Happy death!to you, and always surround death with joyous rites, because this is the opportunity for the greatest of all experiences, when you can finally let go because you know theres nothing else to do.    There was a _kamikaze_ pilot who escaped because his plane that he was flying at an American aircraft carrier went wrong, and he landed in the water instead of hitting the plane, so he survived. But he said afterwards that he had the most extraordinary state of exaltation. It wasnt a kind of patriotic ecstasy, but the very though that in a moment he would cease to exist--he would just be gone--for some mysterious reason that he couldnt understand, made him feel absolutely like a god. And when I talk to a certain German sage whose name is Count Van Derkheim[?], he said that during the war this happened to people again and again and again. He said they heard the bombs screaming down over their heads, and knew this was the last moment, or that they were in a concentration camp with absolutely no hope of getting out, or that they were displaced in such a way that their whole career was shattered. He said in each of these cases, when anybody accepted the situation as totally inevitable, they suddenly got this amazing kind of enlightenment experience of freedom from ego. Well, they tried to explain it to their friends when it was over and everything had settled down again, and their friends said Well, you were under such pressure that you must have gone a little crazy.But Van Derkheim said A great deal of my work is to reassure these people that in that moment there was a moment of truth, and they really saw how things are.   Well then, in Buddhist philosophy, this sort of annihilation of oneself, this acceptance of change is the doctrine of the world as the void. This doctrine did not emerge very clearly, very prominantly, in Buddhism until quite a while after Guatama the buddha had lived. We begin to find this, though, becoming prominant about the year 100 BC, and by 200 AD, it had reached its peak. And this was developed by the Mahayana Buddhists, and it is the doctrine of a whole class of literature which goes by this complex name: _prajna-paramita_. Now prajnameans wisdom.Paramita,a crossing over, or going beyond, and there is a small prajna-paramita sutra, a big prajna-paramita sutra, and then theres a little short summary of the whole thing called the Heart Sutra, and that is recited by Buddhists all over Northern Asia, Tibet, China, and Japan, and it contains the saying that which is void is precisely the world of form, that which is form is precisely the void.Form is emptiness, emptiness is form, and so on, and it elaborates on this theme. Its very short, but its always chanted at important Buddhist ceremonies. And so, it is supposed by scholars of all kinds who have a missionary background that the Buddhists are nihilists, that they teach that the world is really nothing, there isnt anything, and that there seems to be something is purely an illusion. But of course this philosophy is much more subtle than that.    The main person who is responsible for developing and maturing this philosophy was Nagarjuna, and he lived about 200 AD. One of the most astonishing minds that the human race has ever produced. And the name of Nagarjunas school of thought is _Madhyamika_, which means, really, the doctrine of the middle way.But its sometimes also called the doctrine of emptiness,or _Sunyavada_, from the basic world sunya,or sometimes sunyahas taadded on the end, and that tameans ness--emptiness.   Well, then, first of all, emptiness means, essentially, transience,thats the first thing it means. Nothing to grasp, nothing permanant, nothing to hold on to. But it means this with special reference to ideas of reality, ideas of god, ideas of the self, the brahman, anything you like. What it means is that reality escapes all concepts. If you say there is a god, that is a concept; if you say there is no god, thats a concept. And Nagarjuna is saying that always your concepts will prove to be attempts to catch water in a sieve, or wrap it up in a parcel. So he invented a method of teaching Buddhism which was an extention of the dialectic method that the buddha himself first used. And this became the great way of studying, especially at the University of Nalanda[?], which has been reestablished in modern times, but of course it was destroyed by the Muslims when they invaded India. The University of Nalanda, where the dialectic method of enlightenment was taught.    The dialectic method is perfectly simple; it can be done with an individual student and a teacher, or with a group of students and a teacher, and you would be amazed how effective it is when it involves precious little more than discussion. Some of you no doubt have attended tea groups, blab-blab-blabs, or whatever theyre called, things of that kind, in which people are there, and they dont know quite why theyre there, and theres some sort of so- called resource person to disturb them. And after a while they get the most incredible emotions. Somebody tries to dominate the discussion of the group, say, and then the group kind of goes into the question of why hes trying to dominate it, and so on and so forth. Well, these were the original blab-blabs, and they have been repeated in modern times with the most startling effects. That is to say, the teacher gradually elicits from his participant students what are their basic premises of life. What is your metaphisic, in the sense--Im not using metaphysic in a kind of spiritual sense, but what are your basic assumptions? What real ideas do you operate on as to what is right and what is wrong, what is the good life and what is not. What arguments are you going to argue strongest? Where do you take your stand? The teacher soon finds this out, for each individual concerned, and then he demolishes it. He absolutely takes away that persons compass. And so they start getting very frightened, and say to the teacher, All right, I see now, of course I cant depend on this, but what should I depend on?And unfortunately, the teacher doesnt offer any alternative suggestions, but simply goes on to examine the question, Why do you think you have to have something to depend on? Now, this is kept up over quite a period, and the only thing that keeps the students from going insane is the presence of the teacher, who seems to be perfectly happy, but isnt proposing any ideas. Hes only demolishing them.    So we get, finally, but not quite finally, to the void, the sunya, and what then? Well, when you get to the void, there is an enormous and unbelievable sense of relief. Thats nirvana. Whew!, as I gave a proper English translation of nirvana. So they are liberated, and yet, they cant quite say why or what it is they found out, so they call it the void. But Nagarjuna went on to say You mustnt cling to the void.You have to void the void. And so the void of nonvoid is the great state, as it were, of Nagarjunas Buddhism. But you must remember that all that has been voided, all that has been denied, are those concepts in which one has hither to attempted to pin down what is real.    In Zen Buddhist texts, they say You cannot nail a peg into the sky.And so, to be a man of the sky, a man of the void, is also called a man not depending on anything.And when youre not hung on anything, you are the only thing that isnt hung on anything, which is the universe, which doesnt hang, you see. Where would it hang? It has no place to fall on, even though it may be dropping; there will never be the crash of it landing on a concrete floor somewhere. But the reason for that is that it wont crash below because it doesnt hang above. And so there is a poem in Chinese which speaks of such a person as having above, not a tile to cover the head; below, not an inch of ground on which to stand.    And you see, this which to people like us, who are accustomed to rich imageries of the divine--the loving father in heaven, who has laid down the eternal laws, oh word of god incarnate, oh wisdom from above, oh truth unchanged unchanging, oh light of life and love. Then how does it go on? Something about hes written it all in the bible, the wisdom from which the hallowed page, a lantern for our footsteps, shines out from age to age. See, so thats very nice. We feel we know where we are, and that its all been written down, and that in heaven the lord god resplendant with glory, with all the colors of the rainbow, with all the saints and angels around, and everything like that. So we feel thats positive, that weve got a real rip-roaring gutsy religion full of color and so on. But it doesnt work that way.    The more clear your image of god, the less powerful it is, because youre clinging to it, the more its an idol. But voiding it completely isnt going to turn it into what you think of as void. What would you think of as void? Being lost in a fog, so that its white all around, and you cant see in any direction. Being in the darkness. Or the color of your head as perceived by your eyes. Thats probably the best illustration that we would think of as a void, because it isnt black, it isnt white, it isnt anything. But thats still not the void. Take the lesson from the head. How does your head look to your eyes? Well, I tell you, it looks like what you see out in front of you, because all that you see out in front of you is how you feel inside your head. So its the same with this.    And so, for this reason, the great sixth patriarch, Hui-Neng, in China, said it was a great mistake for those who are practicing Buddhist meditation to try to make their minds empty. And a lot of people tried to do that. They sat down and tried to have no thoughts whatsoever in their minds. Not only no thoughts, but no sense experiences, so theyd close their eyes, theyd plug up their ears, and generally go into sensory deprivation. Well, sensory deprivation, if you know how to handle it, can be quite interesting. Itll have the same sort of results as taking LSD or something like that, and there are special labs nowdays where you can be sensorily deprived to an amazing degree.    But if youre a good yogi this doesnt bother you at all, sends some people crazy. But if you did this world, you can have a marvelous time in a sensory deprivation scene. Also, especialy, if they get you into a condition of weightlessness. Skin divers, going down below a certain number of feet--I dont know exactly how far it is--get a sense of weightlessness, and at the same time this deprives them of every sense of responsibility. They become alarmingly happy, and they have been known to simply take off their masks and offer them to a fish. And of course they then drown. So if you skin dive, you have to keep your eye on the time. You have to have a water watch or a friend whos got a string attached to you. If you go down that far, and at a certain specific time you know you have got to get back, however happy you feel, and however much inclined you feel to say Survival? Survival? Whatever the hells the point of that?And this is happening to the men who go out into space. They increasingly find that they have to have automatic controls to bring them back. Quite aside that they cant change in any way from the spaceship, because once you become weightless... Now isnt that interesting?    Can you become weightless here? I said a little while ago that the person who really accepts transience begins to feel weightless. When Suzuki was asked what was it like to have experienced satori, enlightenment, he said its just like ordinary everyday experience, but about two inches off the ground. Juan-Za[?], the Taoist, once said It is easy enough to stand still, the difficulty is to walk without touching the ground.Now why do you feel so heavy? It isnt just a matter of gravitation and weight. It is that you feel that you are carrying your body around. So there is a koan in Zen Buddhism, Who is it that carries this corpse around?Common speech expresses this all of the time: life is a drag.I feel like Im just dragging myself around.My body is a burden to me.To whom? To whom? Thats the question. When there is no body left for whom the body can be a burden, then the body isnt a burden. But so long as you fight it, it is.    So then, when there is no body left to resist the thing that we call change, which is simply another word for life,and when we dispel the illusion that we think our thoughts, instead of being just a stream of thoughts, and that we feel our feelings, instead of being just feelings--its like saying, you know, To feel the feelingsis a redundant expression. Its like saying Actually, I hear sounds,for there ARE no sounds which are not heard. Hearing is sound. Seeing is sight. You dont see sights. Sight-seeing is a ridiculous word! You could say just either sighting,or seeing,one or the other, but SIGHT-seeing is nonsense!    So we keep doubling our words, and this doubling--hearing sounds, seeing sights--is comparable to occilation in an electrical system where theres too much feedback. Where, you remember, in the old-fashioned telephone, where the receiver was separate from the mouthpiece, the transmitter. If you wanted to annoy someone who was abusing you on the telephone, you could make them listen to themselves by putting the receiver to the mouthpiece. But it actually didnt have that effect; it set up occilation. It started a howl that would be very, very hard on the ears. Same way if you turn a television camera at the monitor--that is to say, the television set in the studio, the whole thing will start to jiggle. The visual picture will be of occillation. And the same thing happens here. When you get to think that you think your thoughts, the you standing aside the thoughts has the same sort of consequence as seeing double, and then you think Can I observe the thinker thinking the thoughts?Or, I am worried, and I ought not to worry, but because I cant stop worrying, Im worried that I worry.And you see where that could lead to. It leads to exactly the same situation that happens in the telephone, and that is what we call anxiety, trembling.    But his discipline that were talking about of Nagarjunas abolishes anxiety because you discover that no amount of anxiety makes any difference to anything thats going to happen. In other words, from the first standpoint, the worst is going to happen: were all going to die. And dont just put it off in the back of your mind and say Ill consider that later.Its the most important thing to consider NOW, because it is the mercy of nature, because its going to enable you to let go and not defend yourself all the time, waste all energies in self-defense.    So this doctrine of the void is really the basis of the whole Mahayana movement in Buddhism. Its marvelous. The void is, of course, in Buddhist imagery, symbolized by a mirror, because a mirror has no color and yet reflects all colors. When this man I talked of, Hui-Neng, said that you shouldnt just try to cultivate a blank mind, what he said was this: the void, sunyata, is like space. Now, space contains everything--the mountains, the oceans, the stars, the good people and the bad people, the plants, the animals, everything. The mind in us--the true mind--is like that. You will find that when Buddhists use the word mind--theyve several words for mind,but Im not going into the technicality at the moment-- they mean space. See, space is your mind. Its very difficult for us to see that because we think were IN space, and look out at it. There are various kinds of space. Theres visual space--distance-- there is audible space--silence--there is temporal space--as we say, between times--there is musical space--so-called distance between intervals, or distance between tones, rather; quite a different kind of space than temporal or visual space. Theres tangible space. But all these spaces, you see, are the mind. Theyre the dimensions of consciousness.    And so, this great space, which every one of us aprehends from a slightly different point of view, in which the universe moves, this is the mind. So its represented by a mirror, because although the mirror has no color, it is for that reason able to receive all the different colors. Meister Eckhardt[?] said In order to see color, my eye has to be free from color.So in the same way, in order not only to see, but also to hear, to think, to feel, you have to have an empty head. And the reason why you are not aware of your brain cells--youre only aware of your brain cells if you get a tumor or something in the brain, when it gets sick--but in the ordinary way, you are totally unconscious of your brain cells; theyre void. And for that reason you see everything else.    So thats the central principle of the Mahayana, and it works in such a way, you see, that it releases people from the notion that Buddhism is clinging to the void. This was very important when Buddhism went into China. The Chinese really dug this, because Chinese are a very practical people, and when they found these Hindu Buddhist monks trying to empty their minds and to sit perfectly still and not to engage in any family activities--they were celibates--Chinese thought they were crazy. Why do that? And so the Chinese reformed Buddhism, and they allowed Buddhist priests to marry. In fact, what they especially enjoyed was a sutra that came from India in which a layman was a wealthy merchant called Vimalakirti outargued all the other disciples of buddha. And of course, you know these dialectic arguments are very, very intense things. If you win the argument, everybody else has to be your disciple. So Vimalakirti the layman won the debate, even with Manjustri[?], who is the bodhisattva of supreme wisdom. They all had a contest to define the void, and all of them gave their definitions. Finally Manjustri gave his, and Vimalakirti was asked for his definition, and he said nothing, and so he won the whole argument. The thunderous silence.   So Chinese and Japanese Buddhism is very strongly influenced by that trend that the void and form are the same. This is a very favorite subject for Zen masters and people who like to write. The void precisely is form. And they do this with great flourishes of caligraphy on the big sheets of paper. Ill show you some; Ive got some for the seminar after next. But you see, this is not a denial of the world; its not a putdown idea. To say that this world is diaphanous as, to use Shakespeares phrase, an insubstantial pageant, is really to get into the heart of its glory.  Alan Watts at deoxy.org   Because if I allow you to leave here this  evening, under the impression that you understand something about  Zen, you will have missed the point entirely. Because Zen is a way  of life, a state of being, that is not possible to embrace in any  concept whatsoever, so that any concepts, any ideas, any words that  I shall put across to you this evening will have as their object,  showing you the limitations of words and of thinking.   Now then, if one must try to say something about what Zen is, and I  want to do this by way of introduction, I must make it emphatic that  Zen, in its essence, is not a doctrine. Theres nothing youre  supposed to believe in. Its not a philosophy in our sense, that is  to say a set of ideas, an intellectual net in which one tries to  catch the fish of reality. Actually, the fish of reality is more  like water--it always slips through the net. And in water you know  when you get into it theres nothing to hang on to. All this  universe is like water; it is fluid, it is transient, it is  changing. And when youre thrown into the water after being  accustomed to living on the dry land, youre not used to the idea of  swimming. You try to stand on the water, you try to catch hold of  it, and as a result you drown. The only way to survive in the water,  and this refers particularly to the waters of modern philosophical  confusion, where God is dead, metaphysical propositions are  meaningless, and theres really nothing to hang on to, because were  all just falling apart. And the only thing to do under those  circumstances is to learn how to swim. And to swim, you relax, you  let go, you give yourself to the water, and you have to know how to  breathe in the right way. And then you find that the water holds you  up; indeed, in a certain way you become the water. And so in the  same way, one might say if one attempted to--again I say  misleadingly--to put Zen into any sort of concept, it simply comes  down to this:   That in this universe, there is one great energy, and we have no  name for it. People have tried various names for it, like God, like  *Brahmin, like Tao, but in the West, the word God has got so many  funny associations attached to it that most of us are bored with it.  When people say God, the father almighty,most people feel funny  inside. So we like to hear new words, we like to hear about Tao,  about Brahmin, about Shinto, and __-__-__, and such strange names  from the far East because they dont carry the same associations of  mawkish sanctimony and funny meanings from the past. And actually,  some of these words that the Buddhists use for the basic energy of  the world really dont mean anything at all. The word _tathata_,  which is translated from the Sanskrit as suchnessor thusnessor  something like that, really means something more like dadada, based on the word _tat_, which in Sanskrit means that,and so in  Sanskrit it is said _tat lum asi_, that thou art,or in modern  America, youre it.But da, da--thats the first sound a baby  makes when it comes into the world, because the baby looks around  and says da, da, da, daand fathers flatter themselves and think  its saying DaDa,which means Daddy,but according to Buddhist  philosophy, all this universe is one dadada.That means ten  thousand functions, ten thousand things, one suchness,and were  all one suchness. And that means that suchess comes and goes like  anything else because this whole world is an on-and-off system. As  the Chinese say, its the _yang_ and the _yin_, and therefore it  consists of now you see it, now you dont, here you are, here you  arent, here you are,because that the nature of energy, to be like  waves, and waves have crests and troughs, only we, being under a  kind of sleepiness or illusion, imagine that the trough is going to  overcome the wave or the crest, the _yin_, or the dark principle, is  going to overcome the _yang_, or the light principle, and that off is going to finally triumph over on.And we, shall I say, bug  ourselves by indulging in that illusion. Hey, supposing darkness  did win out, wouldnt that be terrible!And so were constantly  trembling and thinking that it may, because after all, isnt it odd  that anything exists? Its most peculiar, it requires effort, it  requires energy, and it would have been so much easier for there to  have been nothing at all. Therefore, we think well, since being,  since the isside of things is so much effortyou always give up  after a while and you sink back into death. But death is just the  other face of energy, and its the rest, the not being anything  around, that produces something around, just in the same way that  you cant have solidwithout space,or spacewithout solid.When you wake up to this, and realize that the more it changes the  more its the same thing, as the French say, that you are really a  train of this one energy, and there is nothing else but that that is  you, but that for you to be always you would be an insufferable  bore, and therefore it is arranged that you stop being you after a  while and then come back as someone else altogether, and so when you  find that out, you become full energy and delight. As Blake said,  Energy is eternal delight.And you suddenly see through the whole  sham thing. You realize youre That--we wont put a name on it--  youre That, and you cant be anything else. So you are relieved of  fundamental terror. That doesnt mean tht youre always going to be  a great hero, that you wont jump when you hear a bang, that you  wont worry occasionally, that you wont lose your temper. It means,  though, that fundamentally deep, deep, deep down within you, you  will be able to be human, not a stone Buddha--you know in Zen there  is a difference made between a living Buddha and a stone Buddha. If  you go up to a stone Buddha and you hit him hard on the head,  nothing happens. You break your fist or your stick. But if you hit a  living Buddha, he may say ouch,and he may feel pain, because if  he didnt feel something, he wouldnt be a human being. Buddhas are  human, they are not devas, they are not gods. They are enlightened  men and women. But the point is that they are not afraid to be  human, they are not afraid to let themselves participate in the  pains, difficulties and struggles that naturally go with human  existence. The only difference is--and its almost an undetectable  difference--it takes one to know one. As a Zen poem says, when two  Zen masters meet each other on the street, they need no  introduction. When fiends meet, they recognize one another  instantly.So a person who is a real cool Zen understands that,  does not go around Oh, I understand Zen, I have satori, I have  this attainment, I have that attainment, I have the other  attainment,because if he said that, he wouldnt understand the  first thing about it.   So it is Zen that, if I may put it metaphorically, *Jon-Jo said the  perfect man employs his mind as a mirror. It grasps nothing, it  refuses nothing. It receives but does not keep.And another poem  says of wild geese flying over a lake, The wild geese do not intend  to cast their reflection, and the water has no mind to retain their  image.In other words this is to be--to put it very strictly into  our modern idiom--this is to live without hang-ups, the word hang-  upbeing an almost exact translation of the Japanese _bono_ and the  Sanskrit _klesa_, ordinarily translated worldly attachment,though  that sounds a little bit--you know what I mean--it sounds pious, and  in Zen, things that sound pious are said to stink of Zen, but to  have no hang-ups, that is to say, to be able to drift like a cloud  and flow like water, seeing that all life is a magnificent illusion,  a plane of energy, and that there is absolutely nothing to be afraid  of. Fundamentally. You will be afraid on the surface. You will be  afraid of putting your hand in the fire. You will be afraid of  getting sick, etc. But you will not be afraid of fear. Fear will  pass over your mind like a black cloud will be reflected in the  mirror. But of course, the mirror isnt quite the right  illustration; space would be better. Like a black cloud flows  through space without leaving any track. Like the stars dont leave  trails behind them. And so that fundamental--it is called the void in Buddhism; it doesnt mean voidin the sense that its void in  the ordinary sense of emptiness. It means void in that is the most  real thing there is, but nobody can conceive it. Its rather the  same situation that you get between the speaker, in a radio and all  the various sounds which it produces. On the speaker you hear human  voices, you hear every kind of musical instrument, honking of horns,  the sounds of traffic, the explosions of guns, and yet all that  tremendous variety of sounds are the vibrations of one diaphragm,  but it never says so. The announcer doenst come on first thing in  the morning and say Ladies and gentlemen, all the sounds that you  will hear subsequentally during the day will be the vibration of  this diaphragm; dont take them for real.And the radio never  mentions its own construction, you see? And in exactly the same way,  you are never able, really, to examine, to make an object of your  own mind, just as you cant look directly into your own eyes or bite  your own teeth, because you ARE that, and if you try to find it, and  make it something to possess, why thats a great lack of confidence.  That shows that you dont really know your it. And if youre it, you dont need to make anything of it. Theres nothing to look for.  But the test is, are you still looking? Do you know that? I mean,  not as kind of knowledge you possess, not something youve learned  in school like youve got a degree, and you know, Ive mastered the  contents of these books and remembered it.In this knowledge,  theres nothing to be remembered; nothing to be formulated. You know  it best when you say I dont know it.Because that means, Im not  holding on to it, Im not trying to cling to itin the form of a  concept, because theres absolutely no necessity to do so. That  would be, in Zen language, putting legs on a snake or a beard on a  eunuch, or as we would say, gilding the lily.   Now you say, Well, that sounds pretty easy. You mean to say all we  have to do is relax? We dont have to go around chasing anything  anymore? We abandon religion, we abandon meditations, we abandon  this, that, and the other, and just live it up anyhow? Just go on. You know, like a father says to his child who keeps asking Why?  Why, Why, Why, Why, Why? Why did God make the universe? Who made  God? Why are the trees green?and so on and so forth, and father  says finally, Oh, shut up and eat your bun.It isnt quite like  that, because, you see, the thing is this:  All those people who try to realize Zen by doing nothing about it  are still trying desperately to find it, and theyre on the wrong  track. There is another Zen poem which says, You cannot attain it  by thinking, you cannot grasp it by not thinking.Or you could say,  you cannot catch hold of the meaning of Zen by doing something about  it, but equally, you cannot see into its meaning by doing nothing  about it, because both are, in their different ways, attempts to  move from where you are now, here, to somewhere else, and the point  is that we come to an understanding of this, what I call suchness,  only through being completely here. And no means are necessary to be  completely here. Neither active means on the one hand, nor passive  means on the other. Because in both ways, you are trying to move  away from the immediate now. But you see, its difficult to  understand language like that. And to understand what all that is  about, there is really one absolutely necessary prerequisite, and  this is to stop thinking. Now, I am not saying this in the spirit of  being an anti-intellectual, because I think a lot, talk a lot, write  a lot of books, and am a sort of half-baked scholar. But you know,  if you talk all the time, you will never hear what anybody else has  to say, and therefore, all youll have to talk about is your own  conversation. The same is true for people who think all the time.  That means, when I use the word think,talking to yourself,  subvocal conversation, the constant chit-chat of symbols and images  and talk and words inside your skull. Now, if you do that all the  time, youll find that youve nothing to think about except  thinking, and just as you have to stop talking to hear what I have  to say, you have to stop thinking to find out what life is about.  And the moment you stop thinking, you come into immediate contact  with what Korzybski called, so delightfully, the unspeakable  world,that is to say, the nonverbal world. Some people would call  it the physical world, but these words physical,nonverbal, are all conceptual, not a concept either, its (bangs stick).  So when you are awake to that world, you suddenly find that  all the so-called differences between self and other, life and  death, pleasure and pain, are all conceptual, and theyre not there.  They dont exist at all in that world which is (bangs stick). In  other words, if I hit you hard enough, ouchdoesnt hurt, if  youre in a state of what is called no-thought. There is a certain  experience, you see, but you dont call it hurt.Its like when  you were small children, they banged you about, and you cried, and  they said Dont crybecause they wanted to make you hurt and not  cry at the same time. People are rather curious about the things the  do like that. But you see, they really wanted you to cry, the same  way if you threw up one day. Its very good to throw up if youve  eaten soemthing that isnt good for you, but your mother said  Eugh!and made you repress it and feel that throwing up wasnt a  good thing to do. Because then when you saw people die, and  everybody around you started weeping and making a fuss, and then you  learned from that that dying was terrible. When somebody got sick,  everybody else got anxious, and you learned that getting sick was  something awful. You learned it from a concept.   So the reason why there is in the practice of Zen, what we did  before this lecture began, to practice Za-zen, sitting Zen.  Incidentally, there are three other kinds of Zen besides Za-zen.  Standing Zen, walking Zen, and lying Zen. In Buddhism, they speak of  hte three dignities of man. Walking, standing, sitting, and lying.  And they say when you sit, just sit. When you walk, just walk. But  whatever you do, dont wobble. In fact, of course, you can wobble,  if you really wobble well. When the old master *Hiakajo was asked  What is Zen?he said When hungry, eat, when tired, sleep,and  they said, Well isnt that what everybody does? Arent you just  like ordinary people?Oh no,he said, they dont do anything of  the kind. When theyre hungry, they dont just eat, they think of  all sorts of things. When theyre tired, they dont just sleep, but  dream all sorts of dreams.I know the Jungians wont like that, but  there comes a time when you just dream yourself out, and no more  dreams. You sleep deeply and breathe from your heels. Now,  therefore, Za-zen, or sitting Zen, is a very, very good thing in the  Western world. We have been running around far too much. Its all  right; weve been active, and our action has achieved a lot of good  things. But as Aristotle pointed out long ago--and this is one of  the good things about Aristotle. He said the goal of action is  contemplation.In other words, busy, busy, busy, busy, busy, but  whats it all about? Especially when people are busy because they  think theyre GOING somewhere, that theyre going to get something  and attain something. Theres quite a good deal of point to action  if you know youre not going anywhere. If you act like you dance, or  like you sing or play music, then youre really not going anywhere,  youre just doing pure action, but if you act with a thought in mind  that as a result of action you are eventually going to arrive at  someplace where everything will be alright. Then you are on a  squirrel cage, hopelessly condemned to what the Buddhists call  _samsara_, the round, or rat-race of birth and death, because you  think youre going to go somewhere. Youre already there. And it is  only a person who has discovered that he is already there who is  capable of action, because he doesnt act frantically with the  thought that hes going to get somewhere. He acts like he can go  into walking meditation at that point, you see, where we walk not  because we are in a great, great hurry to get to a destination, but  because the walking itself is great. The walking itself is the  meditation. And when you watch Zen monks walk, its very  fascinating. They have a different kind of walk from everybody else  in Japan. Most Japanese shuffle along, or if they wear Western  clothes, they race and hurry like we do. Zen monks have a peculiar  swing when they walk, and you have the feeling they walk rather the  same way as a cat. Theres something about it that isnt hesitant;  theyre going along all right, theyre not sort of vagueing around,  but theyre walking just to walk. And thats walking meditation. But  the point is that one cannot act creatively, except on the basis of  stillness. Of having a mind that is capable from time to time of  stopping thinking. And so this practice of sitting may seem very  difficult at first, because if you sit in the Buddhist way, it makes  your legs ache. Most Westerners start to fidget; they find it very  boring to sit for a long time, but the reason they find it boring is  that theyre still thinking. If you werent thinking, you wouldnt  notice the passage of time, and as a matter of fact, far from being  boring, the world when looked at without chatter becomes amazingly  interesting. The most ordinary sights and sounds and smells, the  texture of shadows on the floor in front of you. All these things,  without being named, and saying thats a shadow, thats red, thats  brown, thats somebodys foot.When you dont name things anymore,  you start seeing them. Because say when a person says I see a  leaf,immediately, one thinks of a spearhead-shaped thing outlined  in black and filled in with flat green. No leaf looks like that. No  leaves--leaves are not green. Thats why Lao-Tzu said the five  colors make a man blind, the five tones make a man deaf,because if  you can only see five colors, youre blind, and if you can only hear  five tones in music, youre deaf. You see, if you force sound into  five tones, you force color into five colors, youre blind and deaf.  The world of color is infinite, as is the world of sound. And it is  only by stopping fixing conceptions on the world of color and the  world of sound that you really begin to hear it and see it.   So this, should I be so bold as to use the word discipline,of  meditation or Za-zen lies behind the extraordinary capacity of Zen  people to develop such great arts as the gardens, the tea ceremony,  the caligraphy, and the grand painting of the Sum Dynasty, and of  the Japanese Sumi tradition. And it was because, especially in tea  ceremony, which means literally cha-no-yuin Japanese, meaning  hot water of tea,they found in the very simplest of things in  everyday life, magic. In the words of the poet *Hokoji, marvelous  power and supernatural activity, drawing water, carrying wood.And  you know how it is sometimes when you say a word and make the word  meaningless, you take the word yes--yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes,  yes, yes. It becomes funny. Thats why they use the word muin Zen  training, which means no.Mu. And you get this going for a long  time, and the word ceases to mean anything, and it becomes magical. Now, what you have to realize in the further continuence of Za-zen,  that as you-- Well, let me say first in a preliminary way, the  easiest way to stop thinking is first of all to think about  something that doesnt have any meaning. Thats my point in talking  about muor yes,or counting your breath, or listening to a  sound that has no meaning, because that stops you thinking, and you  become fascinated in the sound. Then as you get on and you just--the  sound only--there comes a point when the sound is taken away, and  youre wide open. Now at that point, there will be a kind of  preliminary so-called satori, and you will think wowee, thats  it!Youll be so happy, youll be walking on air. When Suzuki  Daisetz was asked what was it like to have satori, he said well,  its like ordinary, everyday experience, except about two inches off  the ground.But theres another saying that the student who has  obtained satori goes to hell as straight as an arrow. No satori  around here, because anybody who has a spiritual experience, whether  you get it through Za-zen, or through LSD, or anything, you know,  that gives you that experience. If you hold on to it, say now Ive  got it,its gone out of the window, because the minute you grab  the living thing, its like catching a handful of water, the harder  you clutch, the faster it squirts through your fingers. Theres  nothing to get hold of, because you dont NEED to get hold of  anything. You had it from the beginning. Because you can see that,  by various methods of meditation, but the trouble is that people  come out of that an brag about it, say Ive seen it.Equally  intolerable are the people who study Zen and come out and brag to  their friends about how much their legs hurt, and how long they sat,  and what an awful thing it was. Theyre sickening. Because the  discipline side of this thing is not meant to be something awful.  Its not done in a masochistic spirit, or a sadistic spirit:  suffering builds character, therefore suffering is good for you.  When I went to school in England, the basic premise of education was  that suffering builds character, and therefore all senior boys were  at liberty to bang about the junior ones with a perfectly clear  conscience, because they were doing them a favor. It was good for  them, it was building their character, and as a result of this  attitude, the word disciplinehas begun to stink. Its been  stinking for a long time. But we need a kind of entirely new  attitude towards this, because without that quiet, and that non-  striving, a life becomes messy. When you let go, finally, because  theres nothing to hold onto, you have to be awfully careful not to  turn into loose yogurt. Let me give two opposite illustrations. When  you ask most people to lie flat on the floor and relax, you find  that they are at full attention, because they dont really believe  that the floor will hold them up, and therefore theyre holding  themselves together; theyre uptight. Theyre afraid that if they  dont do this, even though the floor is supporting them, theyll  suddenly turn into a gelatinous mass and trickle away in all  directions. Then there are other people who when you tell them to  relax, they go like a limp rag. But you see, the human organism is a  subtle combination of hardness and softness. Of flesh and bones. And  the side of Zen which has to do with neither doing nor not doing,  but knowing that you are It anyway, and you dont have to seek it,  thats Zen-flesh. But the side in which you can come back into the  world, with this attitude of not seeking, and knowing youre It, and  not fall apart--that requires bones. And one of the most difficult  things--this belongs to of course a generation we all know about  that was running about some time ago--where they caught on to Zen,  and they started anything-goes painting, they started anything-goes  sculpture, they started anything-goes way of life. Now I think were  recovering from that today. At any rate, our painters are beginning  once again to return to glory, to marvelous articulateness and vivid  color. Theres been nothing like it since the stained glass at Chartre(sp). Thats a good sign. But it requires that there be in our daily use  of freedom, and Im not just talking about political freedom. Im  talking about the freedom which comes when you know that youre It,  forever and ever and ever. And itll be so nice when you die,  because thatll be a change, but itll come back some other way.  When you know that, and youve seen through the whole mirage, then  watch out, because there may still be in you some seeds of  hostility, some seeds of pride, some seeds of wanting to put down  other people, or wanting to just defy the normal arrangements of  life.   So that is why, in the order of a Zen monastary, various duties are  assigned. The novices have the light duties, and the more senior you  get, the heavy duties. For example, the Roshi very often is the one  who cleans out the _benjo_, the toilet. And everything is kept in  order. There is a kind of beautiful, almost princely aestheticism,  because by reason of that order being kept all of the time, the vast  free energy which is contained in the system doesnt run amok. The  understanding of Zen, the understanding of awakening, the  understanding of-- Well, well call it mystical experiences, one of  the most dangerous things in the world. And for a person who cannot  contain it, its like putting a million volts through your electric  shaver. You blow your mind and it stays blown. Now, if you go off in  that way, that is what would be called in Buddhism a pratyeka-  buddha--private buddha. He is one who goes off into the  transcendental world and is never seen again. And hes made a  mistake from the standpoint of Buddhism, because from the standpoint  of Buddhism, there is no fundamental difference between the  transcendental world and this everyday world. The _bodhisattva_, you  see, who doesnt go off into a nirvana and stay there forever and  ever, but comes back and lives ordinary everyday life to help other  beings to see through it, too, he doesnt come back because he feels  he has some sort of solemn duty to help mankind and all that kind of pious  cant. He comes back because he sees the two worlds are the same. He  sees all other beings as buddhas. He sees them, to use a phrase of  G.K. Chestertons, but now a great thing in the street, seems any  human nod, where move in strange democracies the million masks of  god.And its fantastic to look at people and see that they really,  deep down, are enlightened. Theyre It. Theyre faces of the divine.  And they look at you, and they say oh no, but Im not divine. Im  just ordinary little me.You look at them in a funny way, and here  you see the buddha nature looking out of their eyes, straight at  you, and saying its not, and saying it quite sincerely. And thats  why, when you get up against a great guru, the Zen master, or  whatever, he has a funny look in his eyes. When you say I have a  problem, guru. Im really mixed up, I dont understand,he looks at  you in this queer way, and you think oh dear me, hes reading my  most secret thoughts. Hes seeing all the awful things I am, all my  cowardice, all my shortcomings.He isnt doing anything of the  kind; he isnt even interested in such things. Hes looking at, if I  may use Hindu terminology, hes looking at Shiva, in you, saying my  god, Shiva, wont you come off it?  So then, you see, the _bodhisattva_, who is--Im assuming quite a  knowledge of Buddhism in this assembly--but the _bodhisattva_ as  distinct from the pratyeka-buddha, bodhisattva doesnt go off into  nirvana, he doesnt go off into permanant withdrawn ecstasy, he  doesnt go off into a kind of catatonic _samadhi_. Thats all right.  There are people who can do that; thats their vocation. Thats  their specialty, just as a long thing is the long body of buddha,  and a short thing is the short body of buddha. But if you really  understand that Zen, that buddhist idea of enlightenment is not  comprehended in the idea of the transcendental, neither is it  comprehended in the idea of the ordinary. Not in terms with the  infinite, not in terms with the finite. Not in terms of the eternal,  not in terms of the temporal, because theyre all concepts. So, let  me say again, I am not talking about the ordering of ordinary  everyday life in a reasonable and methodical way as being  schoolteacherish, and saying if you were NICE people, thats what  you would do.For heavens sake, dont be nice people. But the  thing is, that unless you do have that basic framework of a certain  kind of order, and a certain kind of discipline, the force of  liberation will blow the world to pieces. Its too strong a current  for the wire. So then, its terribly important to see beyond  ecstasy. Ecstasy here is the soft and lovable flesh, huggable and  kissable, and thats very good. But beyond ecstasy are bones, what  we call hard facts. Hard facts of everyday life, and incidentally,  we shouldnt forget to mention the soft facts; there are many of  them. But then the hard fact, it is what we mean, the world as seen in an  ordinary, everyday state of consciousness. To find out that that is  really no different from the world of supreme ecstasy, well, its  rather like this:   Lets suppose, as so often happens, you think of ecstasy as insight,  as seeing light. Theres a Zen poem which says   A sudden crash of thunder. The mind doors burst open, and there sits the ordinary old man.   See? Theres a sudden vision. Satori! Breaking! Wowee! And the doors  of the mind are blown apart, and there sits the ordinary old man.  Its just little you, you know? Lightning flashes, sparks shower. In  one blink of your eyes, youve missed seeing. Why? Because here  is the light. The light, the light, the light, every mystic in the  world has seen the light.That brilliant, blazing energy, brighter  than a thousand suns, it is locked up in everything. Now imagine  this. Imagine youre seeing it. Like you see aureoles around  buddhas. Like you see the beatific vision at the end of Dantes  Paradiso.Vivid, vivid light, so bright that it is like the clear  light of the void in the Tibetan Book of the Dead. Its beyond  light, its so bright. And you watch it receeding from you. And on  the edges, like a great star, there becomes a rim of red. And beyond  that, a rim of orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet. You see  this great mandela appearing this great sun, and beyond the violet,  theres black. Black, like obsidian, not flat black, but transparent  black, like lacquer. And again, blazing out of the black, as the  _yang_ comes from the _yin_, more light. Going, going, going. And  along with this light, there comes sound. There is a sound so  tremendous with the white light that you cant hear it, so piercing  that it seems to annihilate the ears. But then along with the  colors, the sound goes down the scale in harmonic intervals, down,  down, down, down, until it gets to a deep thundering base which is so  vibrant that it turns into something solid, and you begin to  get the similar spectrum of textures. Now all this time, youve been  watching a kind of thing radiating out. But,it says, you know,  this isnt all I can do,and the rays start dancing like this, and  the sound starts waving, too, as it comes out, and the textures  start varying themselves, and they say, well, youve been looking at  this this as Ive been describing it so far in a flat dimension.  Lets add a third dimension; its going to come right at you now.  And meanwhile, it says, were not going to just do like this, were  going to do little curlicues. And it says, well, thats just the  beginning!Making squares and turns, and then suddenly you see in  all the little details that become so intense, that all kinds of little subfigures are contained in what you originally thought were the  main figures, and the sound starts going all different, amazing  complexities if sound all over the place, and this things going,  going, going, and you think youre going to go out of your mind,  when suddenly it turns into... Why, us, sitting around here.   Thank you very much.  Scribbled down by Alan Seaver.  Alan Watts at deoxy.org  In my talk last night I was discussing the disparity between the way in which most human beings experience their own existence, and the way mans being and nature is described in the sciences. I was pointing out that in such sciences as ecology and biologyecology, for example, describes and studies the relationship between all organisms and their environmentsthe way in which they describe human, animal, and insect behavior is in flat contradiction with the way in which most of us experience our thinking, and our action, and our existence. We have been brought up to experience ourselves as isolated centers of awareness and action, placed in a world that is not us, that is foreign, alien, otherwhich we confront. Whereas, in fact, the way an ecologist describes human behavior is as an action: what you do is what the whole universe is doing at the place you call here and now. You are something the whole universe is doing in the same way that a wave is something that the whole ocean is doing. This is not what you might call a fatalistic or deterministic idea. You see, you might be a fatalist if you think that you are a sort of puppet which life pushes around. Youre separate from life, but life dominates you. Thats fatalism.  But in the point of view Im expressing, the real you is not a puppet which life pushes around. The real, deep down you is the whole universe, and its doing your living organism, and all its behavior. Its expressing it as a singer sings a song. Weve been hoodwinked into the feeling that we exist only inside our skins, and I was showing you last night that that is a hallucination. Its just as nutty as anybody could belike a fruitcake, you knowwho thinks hes Napoleon, or something or other. Thinks hes a poached egg and goes around finding a piece of toast to sit on. Its just like that: a hallucination. And I was showing how we need to experience ourselves in such a way that we could say that our real body is not just whats inside the skin, but our whole total external environment.  Because if we dont experience ourselves that way, we mistreat our environment. We treat it as an enemy. We try to beat it into submission. And if we do thatcomes disaster. We exploit the world we live in, we dont treat it with love, and gentleness, and respect. We cut down millions of acres of forests to turn it into newspaper, of all things. Lovely trees turned into information about nothing, and we dont replace them properly. We kick the world around in revenge for feeling that, really, we are puppets which the world kicks around.  So my main point last night was, then, that we need a new kind of consciousness in which every individual becomes aware that his real self is not just his conscious ego. You know, lets take a headlight of a car. The headlight shines on the road in the front. The headlight does not shine on the wire which connects it with its own battery. So, in a way, the headlight is unaware of how it shines. And in the same way, we are unaware of the sources of our consciousness. We dont know how we know.  And so we are ignorant ofwe ignore; it doesnt come within the scope of our attentionhow it is that we manage to be conscious. How it is that we manage to grow our hair, to shape our bones, to beat our heart, and to secrete all the necessary fluids that we need from our glands. We do it, but we dont know how we do it.  Because, you see, underneath the superficial self, which pays attention to this and that, there is another self more really us than I. And if you become aware of that unknown self, the more you become aware of it, the more you realize that it is inseparably connected with everything else that there is. That you are a function of this total galaxy, bounded by the Milky Way, and that, furthermore, this galaxy is a function of all other galaxies, and that vast thing that you see far off, far off, far off with telescopes, and you look, and look, and lookone day youre going to wake up and say, Why, thats me! And in knowing that, knowyou seethat you never die, that you are the eternal thing that comes and goes, that appears now as John Jones, now as Mary Smith, now as Betty Brown, and so it goes, for ever, and ever, and ever.  Now then, why I made this point as an introduction to what I want to say tonight is the problem of the relationship of man and nature. Do you know: in the history of philosophy there are really three theories of nature? Incidentally, what do you mean when you use the word nature? What is nature-study? Natural history? The Muesum of Natural History; what do you expect to find there? Well, for many people nature means the birds, the bees, and the flowers. It means everything that is not artificial. People think, for example, a building like this is not natural, its artificial. The natural state of the human being is to be naked, but we wear clothes, and thats artificial. We build houses. Is there any difference between a human house and a wasps nest, or a birds nest? Not really. But we do have in our minds, you see, the idea that nature is somehow outside us. Weve got some nature in us. We say theres a thing called human nature, and mostly bad. Human nature, according to Dr. Freud, is motivated by the libido. And you know what that is. And you cant trust it. In the old days they used to beat it with whips, but Freud said, Dont do it that way, you have to treat it as a good horse trainer trains a horse by giving it [a] lump of sugar every now and then, and get it controlled that way. Be kind to it, respect it. Even though its very, very disrespectable.  Well now, there areas I said, in the history of mankindthree theories of nature. The first theory is the Western theory, which is that nature is a machine or an artifact. We inherit this from the Hebrews who believed that nature was made by God in somewhat the same way as a potter makes a pot out of clay, or a carpenter makes a table out of wood. It is not insignificant that Jesus is the son of the carpenter. Our tradition has been to look upon the world as a construct, and somebody knows how it was put togethersomebody understandsand that is the constructor, the architect, the lord God.  But it so happened that, in the 18th century, Western thought began to change. They became increasingly doubtful as to whether there was a maker, whether there was a God. But they continued to look upon the creation as an artifact, as a machine. And by the time of Newton people were explaining the world in terms of mechanism, and we are still under the influence of that idea becauseafter all, in things like Life Magazine and so on, when they give you an article on human physiologythey usually make drawings which show the human being as a kind of mechanism, as a sort of factory. And they show how the peristaltic action carries the food in, and how its processed by this organ and that organ, just as if a certain product is fed into a factorya cow at one endand it comes out canned corned beef at the other.  Just in such a way the human is illustrated, and soin some kinds of rather degraded medicine that is now practicedwhen you go to the hospital for a medical examination, you are treated as a machine. They process you. Youre not a person. Youre put in a wheelchair immediately, even if you were perfectly healthy and can walk, nevertheless they have to have you in this wheelchair. And they put you through a process. And the heart specialist looks only at your heart because he cant understand anything else. The otorhinolaryngologistwhich means an ear, nose, and throat manlooks at that section of you, and he doesnt know about anything else. And maybe a psychiatrist takes a look at you, and goodness knows what happens there. And so on, and so on; everybody looks at you from their specialized point of view as if they were a bunch of mechanics examining your automobile. Because, as I said last night, we just asked for this, because most of us consider ourselves as chauffeurs inside our bodies which we own in the same way as you own a car. And when it goes wrong you take it to the mechanic to fix it. You dont really identify with your body, just as you dont really identify with your car. So here is this whole theory of naturewhich has grown up in the Westas an artifact, something made.  Now let me take a second theory of nature. This is an Indian theory; East Indian. Nature not as an artifact, but as drama. Basic to all Hindu thought is the idea that the world is my (). That is a Sanskrit word which means many things; it means magic, illusion, art, play. All the worlds a stage. And in the Hindu idea there isthe ultimate reality of the universeis the Self, which they call Brahman, or tman. Thats what there is. The Self: universal, eternal, boundless, indescribable. And everything that happens, happens on the Self. Like you say, Its on me. The drinks, tonight, are on me. Or like we say, when you hear the radio, Its on the speaker. You see, everything you hear on the radioflutes, drums, human voices, traffic noises, any imaginable soundall those sounds are vibrations of the diaphragm in the speaker. But the radio doesnt tell you that. The announcer doesnt come on and say every morning, Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. This is KQED. The following sounds that you are going to hear are vibrations of the diaphragm in your speaker, and theyre not really human voices or musical instruments, but just that. They never let you in on that.  And in exactly the same way, the universe doesnt let you in on the truth that all sense experiences are vibrations of the Selfnot just your self, but the Selfand all of us share this Self in common because it is pretending to be all of us. Brahman, the ultimate principle, plays hide and seek eternally. And he does it for unspeakably long periods of time. The Hindus measure time in what is called a kalpa: thats 4,320,000 years. (Dont take this seriously, its not meant to be taken literally.) But just for an unspeakably long time, the Brahmanthe Selfpretends that its lost and is us. And all our adventures and all our troubles, and all our agonies and tragediesit gets mixed up in them. Then, after the period of 4,320,000 years has elapsed, there is a catastrophe. The universe is destroyed in fire, and after that the Brahman wakes up and says, Well, good crazy! What an adventure that was! He wipes the sweat of his brow and says, Whew! Lets rest a while. So, for another 4,320,000 years the divine Self rests and knows who it is: its me. Then it says, Well, this is rather boring. Lets get going again. Lets get mixed up. And it does it in a very strange way because, the way the Hindus time it, the first period of getting mixed upgetting lostis beautiful. Thats the longest period. Everythings right; its justlifes glorious. Then it has the next period in which things get a little wonky. Something is vaguely out of order. That doesnt last so long. Then the next period, the third, is when good and evil are equally balanced. And thats still not so long. Finally comes the shortest period when everything bad triumphs, and the whole thing blows up and we begin all over again. Were supposed to be living in that now; its whats called kali yuga, the age of darkness, and it began on Friday, February 23rd, 3,123 B.C., and it has 5,000 years to run. But as it goes on time gets faster, so dont worry.  So you see, thats a theory of nature as a drama. Its a play. Now, theres a third theory of nature, which is Chinese. And this is very interesting. The Chinese word for naturethey call zrn (). And this expression means of itself, so; what happens of itself. Or we might say spontaneity. It almost means automatic, because automatic is what is self-moving. Only, we associate the word automatic with machinery. But zrn, what is so of itself, is associated in the Chinese mind not with machinery but with biology. Your hair grows by itself, you dont have to think how to grow it. Your heart beats by itself, you dont have to make up your mind how to beat it. Thats what they mean by nature. The poem says:  So their principle of nature is called the Taot-a-o, pronounced /da/ in the Mandarin dialect, /tau/ in the Shanghai dialect, /tou/ in the Cantonese dialect; take your choice. Tao means the course of nature, and Lao Tzu, who was a philosopher who lived a little later than 400 B.C., wrote a book about the Tao. And he said, The Tao which can be spoken is not the eternal Tao. You cant describe it. He said the principle of the Tao is spontaneity. He said, The great Tao flows everywhere, both to the left and to the right. It loves and nourishes all things but does not lord it over them. It accomplishes merits and lays no claim to them. So there is a very great difference between the Chinese idea of Tao as the informing principle of nature, and the Judeo-Christian idea of God as natures lord and master. Because the Tao does not act as a boss. In the Chinese philosophy of nature, nature has no boss. There is no principle that forces things to behave the way they do. It is a completely democratic theory of nature.  Correspondingly, you see, most Westernerswhether they be Christians or non-Christiansdont trust nature. Of all things, nature is the thing least to be trusted. You must manage it, you must watch out for it; it will always go wrong if you dont watch out. You know, the goblins will get you if you dont watch out. So were always feeling that you cant trust it. See, were absolutely instilled with the idea of original sin. You cant trust nature, because it comes out with weeds and insects. And above all, you cant trust human nature, because if you dont hold a club over yourself youll go out and rape your grandmother.  Now, the Chinese would say if you cant trust yourself, you cant trust anybody. Because if you cant trust yourself, can you trust your mistrust of yourself? Is that well-founded? See? If you cant trust yourself, youre totally mixed up. You havent a leg to stand on, you havent a point of departure for anything. And in this respect the Taoist philosophy and the Confucian philosophy are in agreement. In Confucius philosophy, the fundamental virtue of a human being is called jen ()spelled j-e-n for reasons best known to Chinese scholars; I dont know what they are. But its pronounced ren. And its a characterChinese characterthat Confucius placed as the highest of all virtues; higher than righteousness, higher than benevolence. And it means approximately human-heartedness.  Now, Confucius once said that goody-goodies are the thieves of virtue. Virtue, in Chinese, is de (). We romanize it as t-e-h. De. And it means virtue not in the sense of moral propriety, but virtue in the sense of magic, as when we speak of the healing virtues of a certain plant. A man of true virtue is, therefore, a human-hearted man. And the meaning of this is that one should, above all, trust human nature in the full recognition that its both good and bad. That its both loving and selfish.  Now, let me give an illustration of the wisdom of this. When people fight wars, I trust them if the reason for which they fight a war is to expropriate somebody elses possessions and women, because they will fight a merciful war. They will not destroy the possessions and the women that they want to capture. They want to enjoy them, and thats a war based on simple, ordinary, everyday human greed. The most awful wars that are waged are the wars waged for moral principles. You are a lousy Communist. You have a philosophy that is destructive to religion and to everything that we love, and value, and reverence. And therefore, we will exterminate you to the last man unless you surrender unconditionally. Such wars are ruthless beyond belief. We can blow up whole cities, wipe people out, because we are not greedy, we are righteous. That is why the goody-goodies are the thieves of virtue. If you are going to do something evil, do it for a plain, honest, selfish motive. Dont do it in the name of Godbecause if you do, it turns you into a monster who is no longer human; a sadist, a pure destroyer.  So an inflexibly righteous person is not human, and that is whyin Chinese ideas of justicea good judge is not somebody who abides by the book. Their idea of justice is, For Gods sake, keep the case out of court. Let us have a consultation behind the scenes, and lets arrange a compromise. Because we know our opponent is a rascalI know I am a rascaland therefore there can be a mutual arrangement between thieves. So we [...] we talk about it, and we call the judge inin an unofficial capacityand the judge hums and haws, and if hes a good judge he has a sense of what is called l. Im going to talk to you about another meaning of a word pronounced l later on, but its quite a different word. Li is justice, but you cant write it down. There is another word for justice, or law, in Chinese: zi. And this word representsin its Chinese character forma cauldron for cooking sacrifices, and a knife. In the high and far-off times of Chinese history there was an emperor who, when the people brought their sacrificesof meat, and so onto be put in the cauldrons, he also scratchedwith the knifeon the side of the cauldrons the laws of the state, so that all the people could read them and understand what they were. But the sages who advised this emperor said that was a very bad thing to do, because the moment people see the law written down they develop a litigious spirit. That is to say, they think out ways of wangling around it. And thats what we do all the time, dont we? The moment Congress passes a lawtax law, especiallyall the lawyers get together and they fill it full of holes. They say, Well, it didnt define this, and it didnt say that. And some of those Confucians wanted to put the language in order and to make all the words mean just so, but the Taoists laughed at them and said, If you define the words, with what words are you going to define the words that define the words? So they said, therefore, the emperor should not have written the laws down, because a sense of justice is not something you can put in words. Its what our lawyers call equity. And you talk to any lawyer, and hein discussing various judges around townhe will say, Well, judge So-And-So is pretty much a stickler for the letter of the law. But on the other hand, judge So-And-So has a sense of equity. He knows when the letter of the law just doesnt apply to this particular case, and he just has an innate sense of fair play. Thats the man to be trusted as a judge. So this is what the Chinese mean by a judge who has the sense of l, of real justice. It cant be written down, it cant be explained, because every case is individual.  But what such a man has fundamentally in his heart: he trusts the good and bad of human nature. Human beings are complex. We dont know ourselves at all, really. Consider your nervous system. Neurologists havent even begun to figure it out, and yet all your conscious decisions are based on this thing that you dont understand. Youre unbelievably more wise in your nature than you ever will be in your conscious thoughts, because behind your conscious thoughts lies your nervous system. And if you say, Well, my nervous system is unreliable. It is just a bunch of strange, weird biological chances that have gotten mixed up somehow. Then this very opinion that youre expressingyou see?is a function of that nervous system. So youre saying that you are a total hoax; you cant trust yourself at all. So that is a set of game rules that dont lead anywhere; its totally self-frustrating.  So you see, what the Chinese have developed here is a theory of nature. I said there are three theories: the Western Mechanical Theory (nature as an artifact), the Hindu Dramatic Theory, and the Chinese Organic Theory. Naturehuman nature includedis an organism, and an organism is a system of orderly anarchy. There is no boss in it, but it gets along by being left alone and being allowed to do its stuff. Thats what the Chinese Taoist philosophy calls wu wei (), which meansnot doing nothingbut not interfering with the course of events. Not acting against the grain.  Now this is the time to introduce the second word l in Chinese. The first l meant justice. The second li () is a character which had the original meaning of the markings in jade, the grain in wood, and the fiber in muscle. And its usually translated reason, or the principle of things. These are not very good translations. The best translation of l is organic pattern. Now look here: when you look at the clouds, they arent symmetrical, they dont form fours, they dont come along in cubes, but you know at once that theyre not a mess. A dirty old ashtray full of junk may be a mess, but clouds dont look like that. When you look at the patterns of foam on water, they never make an artistic mistake and theyre not mess. They are wiggly, but in a way orderlyand its difficult for us to describe that kind of order.  Now take a look at yourselves. Youre all wiggly. We think, you know, were pretty ordinary because there are a lot of us that look approximately the same. So when we see a human being we think, Well, thats pretty much in order, and kind of regular, and its okay. But we dont realize how wiggly we are; we are just like clouds, rocks, and stars. Look at the way the stars are arranged. Do you criticize the way the stars are arranged? Would you like them to form fours? Would you like them to be sort of set out, like needlepoint, on the canvas of the skies? There was somebody in the 18th centuryin the days when they built formal gardens of clipped hedges and made all the tulips stand together like soldierswho criticized the stars for being irregularly arranged, but today we dont feel that way. We love the way the stars are scattered, and they never make a mistake in their arrangement. What about mountain ranges? Do you criticize the valleys for being low and praise the peaks for being high? You just say its great; its the way it is.  Now that kind of orderthe artist pays a tribute to it by painting a landscape. People, you knowin every national park, theres a place called Inspiration Point. And people go there and they say, Aah, its just like a picture! And nobody knew this 400 years ago. It took the artists to paint landscape, and then people realized how beautiful it is. Nowadays, artists are painting pictures of damp, stained walls, and floors where people have dropped a lot of paint. And one day people will walk into a room where theres a lot of paint been scattered on the floor and on general [...] thing and theyll say, My goodness, its just like a Jackson Pollock! Oh, aint it just like a picture? See? It always takes the artist to show us the vision. But of course, in the meantime, its difficult. You go to an exhibition of contemporary non-objective painting, and a kind of square fellow walks in there and he says, Thats not what I call a picture! Because its against his prejudices. But I say to people, Now, excuse me. Wait a minute. Take a look at that again. Im going to tell you something. That painting is a colored photograph ofguess what? And he looks at it in astonishment and entirely new eyes. What could that be a photograph of? And he begins to see it might be a photograph through a microscope; of globules of germs floating in liquid. Might be anything, but there it is; it suddenly comes at him! Goodness knows whether that was what the artist intended, but thats a method of giving people a shock; of seeing things in a new way.  You know, a G.I. visited Picasso in Paris during the war and said, I cant understand your paintings. Theyre absurd; life doesnt look like that. Picasso said, Do you have a girlfriend? He said, Yes. Have you a picture? He said, Yes. Show it. So he drew out his billfold, and there was a little colored photograph of his girlfriend. And Picasso looked at it and said, Is she so small as that?  Now then: the idea of l, the idea of natural order, is like this: patterns on foam, patterns in jade, the shapes of the clouds, the shapes of trees and mountains. They are orderly, but we cannot put our finger on the order. We know its orderly but we dont know why, and we know its completely different from a mess. The order of nature is in that way, then, indefinable. Wewhen Saint Augustine was asked, What is time? he said, I know what it is, but when you ask me I dont. And so in the same way the Chinese would say, We know what the order of nature is, but if you ask us we dont. The poet says,   Thats l. Nature as a self-ordering principle, but it doesnt really know how it does it. Another poem says,  This is a very remarkable attitude to nature. Politically, you seeto translate this into politicsit is high philosophical anarchy, and there is a lot to be said for this as a political point of view. That, in other words, government is always a mess, because the state opposes itself to the people. We live under a constitution where we are supposed to be governed by ourselves. As somebody once said, Down with democracy when we get it. Because the state alwaysthe government always creates itself as a business in competition with all the other businesses. And it wins because its the biggest one of the bunch. The Taoists said of the state that it should be as anonymous and as unobtrusive as possible. That is to say that the emperorinstead of going around in processions, and being heralded, and flags wavedshould be as unobtrusive as the head of the sanitation department. You knowhes a man, just a guy who goes around in a plain, ordinary suit, and really attends to his job. When the head of the sanitation of the city of Dallas goes around you dont have a police escort and sirens blowing and flags waving, he simply does his job. And the feeling of Lao Tzu is that the president, or the emperor, should have the same kind of attitude: that he should simply help the people and retire, and not claim any merits for it. Always withdraw himself, always be behind the scenes. Not striving for power, but simply to help things along. Govern a great state, he said, as you would cook a small fish. Now, you know, when youve got a small fish in the frying pan, dont keep tossing it around and fidgeting with the spatula, otherwise itll fall apart. Do it gently. Softly, softly, catchee monkey.  So then, here is a conception of nature as something you must trust. Outside naturethe birds, the bees, the flowers, the mountains, the cloudsand inside nature; human nature. Now, nature isnt trustworthy, completely. Itll sometimes let you down with a wallop. But thats the risk you take; thats the risk of life. Whats the alternative? I do not trust nature at all. Its got to be watched. You know what that leads to? It leads to 1984 and Big Brother. It leads to the totalitarian state where everybody is his brothers policeman, where everybody is watching everybody else to report them to the authorities, where you cant trust your own motivation, where you have to have a psychoanalyst in charge of you all the time to be sure that you dont think dangerous thoughts, or peculiar thoughts. And you report all your thoughts to your analyst, and your analyst keeps a record of them and reports them to the government. And everybody is busy keeping records of everything. Its much more important to record what happens than what happens.  This is already eating us up. Its much more important that you have your books right than that you conduct your business in a good way. In universities its much more important that the registrars records be in order than that the library be well stocked. After all, do you know your grades are all locked up in safes, and theyre protected from thievery and pilfering, and theyre the most valuable property that the university has. The library can go hang. Then, furthermore, the main function of a universityas any sensible person would imagine[is] to teach students and to do research. So the faculty should be the most important thing in the university. On the contrarythe administration is the most important thing. The people who keep the records, who make the game rules up. And so the faculty are always being obstructed by the administration and being forced to attend irrelevant meetings, and to do everything but scholarship.  Do you know what scholarship means? What a school means? The original meaning of a scholar? Leisure. We talked of a scholar and a gentleman, because a gentleman was a person who had a private income and he could afford to be a scholar. He didnt have to earn a living, therefore he could study the classics, and poetry, and things like that. Today, nothing is more busy than a school. They make you work, work, work, work, workbecause youve got to get through on schedule, they have expedited courses, and you go to school so as to get a union card, or Ph.D. or something, so that you can earn a living. Its a whole contradiction of scholarship. Scholarship is to study everything thats unimportant, not necessary for survival. All the charming irrelevancies of life.  But you see, the thing is this: if you dont have a room in your life for the playful, lifes not worth living. All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy. But if the only reason for which Jack plays is that he can work better afterwards, hes not really playing. Hes playing because its good for him. Hes not playing at all! You have to be ableto be a true scholarhave to cultivate an attitude to life where youre not trying to get anything out of it. You pick up a pebble on the beach and look at it: beautiful! Dont try and get a sermon out of it. Sermons in stones and God in everything be damned. Just enjoy it. Dont feel that youve got to salve your conscience by saying that this is for the advancement of your aesthetic understanding. Enjoy the pebble. If you do that, you become healthy. You become able to be a loving, helpful human being. But if you cant do that, if you can only do things because somehow youre going to get something out of it, youre a vulture.  So we have to learnwe dont have to, you know. You dont have to do anything; you dont have to go on living. But its a great idea, its a great thing, if you can learn what the Chinese call purposelessness. They think nature is purposeless. When we say somethings purposeless, thats a put-down. Theres no future in it. Its a wash-out. But when they hear the word purposeless, they think thats just great. Its like the waves washing against the shore: going on, and on, and on forever with no meaning. A great Zen master said as his death poem, just before he died, From the bathtub to the bathtub, I have uttered stuff and nonsense. The bathtub in which the baby is washed at birth, the bathtub in which the corpse is washed before burial, all this time I have said many nonsenses. Like the birds in the trees go Twee! Twee! Twee! Twee! Twee! Whats it all about? Everybody tries to say, Oh, its just a mating call. Its purposeful; theyre trying to get their mate, you know? Attract them, with a song. Thats why they have colors, and butterflies have eyes on them: self-protection. The engineering-view of the universe. Why do that? They say, Well, its because they need to survive. Well, why survive? Whats that for? Well to survive!  See, human beings are really a lot of tubes. And all living creatures are just tubes. And these tubes have to put things in at one end and let it out at the other. Then they get clever about it and they develop nerve ganglia on one end of the tubethe eating endcalled a head. And thats got eyes in it, its got ears in it, its got little organsantennae and things like thisand that helps you to find things to put in one end so that you can let them out the other. Well, while youre doing this, you see, the stuff going through wears the tube out. And so that the show can go on the tubes have complicated ways of making other tubes, who go on doing the same thing. In at one end, out the other. And they say, Well, thats terribly serious! Thats awfully important; weve got to keep on doing this.  But when [the] Chinese say nature is purposeless, this is a compliment. Its like the idea ofthe Japanese have a word, ygen (), and they describe ygen as watching wild geese fly and be hidden in the clouds. As watching a ship vanish behind a distant island. As wandering on and on in a great forest with no thought of return. Havent you done this? Havent you gone on a walk with no particular purpose in mind? Carry a stick with you and you occasionally hit at old stumps? Wander along and sometimes twiddle your thumbs? Its at that moment that you are a perfectly rational human being. Youve learned purposelessness.  All music is purposeless. Is music getting somewhere? If it were I mean, if the aim of music wereof a symphonywere to get to the final bar, the best conductor would be the one who got there fastest. See? Dancingwhen you dance, you aim to arrive at a particular place on the floor. Is that the idea of dancing? The aim of dancing is to dance! Its the present. Well, its exactly the same with our life! We think life has a purpose.  I remember the preachers used to saywhen I was a small boy Id always hear itWe must follow Gods purpose. His purpose for you and his purpose for me. When I asked these cats what the purpose was they never knew! They didnt know what it was; they had a hymn: God is working his purpose out as year succeeds to year; God is working his purpose out, and the time is drawing near; the time when the Earth shall be full of the glory of God as the waters cover the sea. Whats the glory of God? Well, they werent quite sure.  Ill tell you what it is. In heaven all those angels are gathered around the glory of God. That is to say, the which than which there is no whicher. Catholics call it the beatific vision, the Jews call it the Shekhinah. There are all those angels. And theyre standing around it and theyre saying, Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! It means nothing. Theyre just having a ball. See, thats what happened in the beginning: when God created the universe, it was createdlike all stars, all planets, all galaxies: theyre vaguely spherical. He created this and said, Have a ball! But before he said that he said, You must draw the line somewhere. That was the real thing he said first; before Let there be light, that came later. First thing was, You must draw the line somewhere. Otherwise nothing will happen. You know? Youve got to have the good guys, the bad guys, youve got to have this, youve got to have that. Black and white, light and darkness. Must draw the line somewhere.  Now heres the choice, then: are you going to trust it or not? If you do trust it you may get let down. And this it is your self, your own nature, and all nature around you. There are going to be mistakes. But if you dont trust it at all, youre going to strangle yourself. Youre going to fence yourself round with rules and regulations and laws and prescriptions and policemen and guardsand whos going to guard the guards, and whos going to look after Big Brother to be sure that he doesnt do something stupid? No go.  Supposing I get annoyed with somebody in the audience, and Im going to throw this ashtray at them. Well, I dont want to hit my friend sitting next to that person. I want to be absolutely sure this ashtray hits that individual. And so I dont trust myself to throw it. I have to carry it along and be sure I hit that person on the head. See, I dont throw it because I cant let go of it. To throw it I must let go of it. To live I must have faith. I must trust myself to the totally unknown. I must trust myself to a nature which doesnt have a boss. Because a boss is a system of mistrust. That is why Lao-Tzus Tao Loves and nourishes all things but does not lord it over them.  Its really a very unorthodox and un-academic thing to do to start a discussion with a group of psychologists on the subject of metaphysics, but we have to do that because a lot of people say that their approach to life is scientificas distinct from metaphysicaland that metaphysics is bosh anyway. But everybodyby virtue of being a human beingis, willy-nilly, a metaphysician. That is to say, everybody starts from certain fundamental assumptions as to what is the Good Life, what he wants, what are hisshall we sayaxioms for living? And I find that psychologists tend to be blind to these fundamental assumptions. Maybe its truer of psychiatrists than it is of psychologists, but they tend to feel that they are scientists. And theyre rather bending over backwards to have a scientific status, because that, of course, is fashionable in our age.  But you know, its so amusing that when, saylets take psychoanalysis for example. Its pointed out to many philosophers that their philosophical ideas are capable of being shown to have a psychoanalytic reference. For example, John Wisdom wrote a book about the philosophy of Berkeley in which he attributed a great deal of his point of view to his experiences in toilet-training as a child. The philosopher is very grateful to the psychoanalyst for revealing to him his unconscious and its emotional contents. But the psychoanalyst must, in turn, await a revelation from the philosopher as to his philosophical unconscious, and the unexamined assumptions which lie in it.  So if I may start by insulting your intelligence with what is called the most elementary lesson: the thing that we should have learned before we learned one, two, three and A, B, C, but somehow was overlooked. Now, this lesson is quite simply this: that any experience that we have through our senseswhether of sound, or of light, or of touchis a vibration. And a vibration has two aspects: one called on, and the other called off. Vibrations seem to be propagated in waves, and every wave system has crests and it has troughs. And so life is a system of now you see it, now you dont. And these two aspects always go together. For example, sound is not pure sound, it is a rapid alternation of sound and silence. And thats simply the way things are. Only you must remember that the crest and the trough of a wave are inseparable. Nobody ever saw crests without troughs or troughs without crests, just as you dont encounter in life people with fronts but no backs. Just as you dont encounter a coin that has a heads but no tails. And although the heads and the tails, the fronts and the backs, the positives and the negatives are different, theyre at the same time one. And one has to get used, fundamentally, to the notion that different things can be inseparable; that what is explicitly two can at the same time be implicitly one. If you forget that, very funny things happen.  If, therefore, we forget, you see, that black and white are inseparable and that existence is constituted equivalently by being and non-being, then we get scared. And we have to play a game called, Uh-oh, black might win! And once we get into the fear that blackthe negative sidemight win, we are compelled to play the game, But white must win! And from that start all our troubles. Because, you see, the human awareness is a very odd mechanism. (I dont think mechanism is quite the right word, but itll do for the moment.) That is to say, we haveas a speciesspecialized in a certain kind of awareness, which we call conscious attention. And by this we have the faculty of examining the details of life very closely. We can restrict our gaze, and it corresponds somewhat to the central field, the vision, in the eyes. We have central vision, we have peripheral vision. Central vision is that which we use for reading, for all sorts of close work, and its like using a spotlight. Whereas peripheral vision is more like using a floodlight.  Now, civilization and civilized human beingsfor maybe 5,000 years, maybe much longerhave learned to specialize in concentrated attention. Even if a persons attention span is short he is, as it were, wavering his spotlight over many fields. The price which we pay for specialization in conscious attention is ignorance of everything outside its field. I would rather say ignore-ance than ignorance, because if you concentrate on a figure you tend to ignore the background. You tend, therefore, to see the world in a disintegrated aspect. You take separate things and events seriously, imagining that these really do exist when actually they have the same kind of existence as an individuals interpretation of a Rorschach blot: theyre what you make out of it. In fact, our physical world is a system of inseparable differences. Everything exists with everything else, but we contrive not to notice that because what we notice is what is noteworthy. And we notice it in terms of notations: numbers, words, images. What is notable, noteworthy, notated, noticed is what appears to us to be significant and the rest is ignored as insignificant, and as a result of that we select from the total input that goes to our senses only a very small fraction. And this causes us to believe that we are separate beings, isolated by the boundary of the epidermis from the rest of the world.  You see, this is also the mechanism involved in not noticing that black and white go together. Not noticing that every inside has an outside, and that what goes on inside your skin is inseparable from what goes on outside your skin. You see that, for example, in the science of ecology. One learns that a human being is not an organism in an environment, but is an organism-environmentthat is to say, a unified field of behavior. If you describe, carefully, the behavior of any organism, you cannot do so without at the same time describing the behavior of the environment. And by that you know that youve got a new entity of study. Youre describing the behavior of a unified field. You must be very careful indeed not to fall into old Newtonian assumptions about the billiard-ball nature of the universe. The organism is not the puppet of the environment, being pushed around by it. Nor, on the other hand, is the environment the puppet of the organism, being pushed around by the organism. The relationship between them is, to use John Deweys word, transactional. The transaction being a situation, like buying and selling, in which there is no buying unless somebody sells and no selling unless somebody buys.  So that fundamental relationship between ourselves and the world, which is in an old-fashioned wayby people such as Skinner, who has not updated his philosophyinterpreted in terms of Newtonian mechanics. He interprets the organism as something determined by the total environment, he doesnt see that in a more modern way of talking about it, theyre simply describing a unified field of behaviorwhich is nothing more than what any mystic ever said. Thats a dirty word in the modern academic scientific environment. But if a mystic is one who is sensiblyor even sensuouslyaware of his inseparability, as an individual, from the total existing universe, hes simply a person who has become sensibleaware through his sensesof the way ecologists see the world. So when Im in academic circles I dont talk about mystical experience, I talk about ecological awareness. Same thing.  And so the next aspect of our metaphysical introduction must be about games. You know, I think there are really four questions that all philosophers have discussed from the beginning of recorded time. First is: Who started it? The second is: Are we going to make it? The third is: Where are we going to put it? And the fourth is: Who is going to clean up? When you think these over it poses a fifth question: Is it serious? And thats the one I want to discuss; Is existence serious? Like you say, Doctorafter hes looked at your x-rayis it serious? What does that mean? It means: Am I in danger of not continuing to survive?  But the basis of it all is this, now: if we say, You must survive, or I must survive, life is earnest and Ive got to go on. Then your life is a drag and not a game. Now, its my contention and my personal opinionthis is my basic metaphysical axiom, shall we put it that waythat existence, the physical universe, is basically playful. There is no necessity for it whatsoever. It isnt going anywhere, that is to say, it doesnt have some destination that it ought to arrive at. But it is best understood by analogy with music. Because music, as an art form is essentially playful; we say you play the piano, you dont work the piano.  Why? Music differs, say, from travel. When you travel you are trying to get somewhere. And of course, webecause being a very compulsive and purposive cultureare busy getting everywhere faster and faster and faster, until we eliminate the distance between places. I mean, with the modern jet travel you can arrive almost instantaneously. What happens as a result of that is that the two ends of your journey become the same place. So you eliminate the distance and you eliminate the journey, because the fun of the journey is to travel, not to obliterate travel.  In music, though, one doesnt make the end of a composition the point of the composition. If that were so the best conductors would be those who played fastest. And there would be composers who wrote only finales. People would go to concerts just to hear one crashing chord, because thats the end! Say, when dancing, you dont aim at a particular spot in the room; thats where you should arrive. The whole point of the dancing is the dance.  But we dont see that as something brought by our education into our everyday conduct. Weve got a system of schooling which gives a completely different impression. Its all graded. And what we do is we put the child into the corridor of this grade system with a kind of, Cmon kitty, kitty, kitty! And now you go to kindergarten, you know? And thats a great thing because when you finish that you get into first grade. And thencmon!first grade leads to second grade, and so on, and then you get out of grade school and you go to high school, and its revving upthe thing is coming!then youre going to go to college, and by Jove then you get into graduate school, and when youre through with graduate school you go out to join the World. And then you get into some racket where youre selling insurance, and theyve got that quota to make. And youre going to make that. And all the time this thing is coming. Its coming! Its coming! That great thing, the success youre working for.  Then, when you wake up one dayabout 40 years oldyou say, My God, Ive arrived! Im there! And you dont feel very different from what you always felt. And theres a slight let-down because you feel theres a hoax. And there was a hoax. A dreadful hoax. They made you miss everything by expectation. Look at the people who live to retire and put those savings away. And then, when theyre 65, they dont have any energy left, theyre more or less impotent, and they go and rot in an old peoplesSenior Citizenscommunity. Because weve simply cheated ourselves the whole way down the line. We thought of life by analogy with a journey, with a pilgrimage, which had a serious purpose at the end and the thing was to get to that end. Successor whatever it is, or maybe heavenafter youre dead. But we missed the point the whole way along. It was a musical thing and you were supposed to sing, or to dance, while the music was being played. But you had to do that thing. You didnt let it happen.  And so in this way the human being sometimes becomes an organism for self-frustration. Lets takeKorzybski called man a time-binder. That means that hes the animal peculiarly aware of the time sequence, and as a result of this is able to do some very remarkable things: he can predict. He studies whats happened in the past and he says the chances are so-and-so of that happening again. And so he predicts. Oh, this is very usefulto be able to predictbecause that has survival value. But at the same time it creates anxiety. You pay for this increased survival ability involved in prediction by knowing that in the end you wont succeed. Youre all going to fall apart by one way or another. It might happen tomorrow, it might happen 50 years from now. But it all comes apart in the end, and people get worried about that; they get anxious. So what they gained on the roundabout they lost on the swings.  If you see, on the other hand, that existencethis is, as I said, my basic metaphysical assumption which I wont conceal from youthat existence is musical in nature. That is to say that it is not serious, it is a play of all kinds of patterns. We can look upon different creatures as we look at different games; as we look at chess, checkers, backgammon, tennis, theres the tree-game, the beetle-game, the grass-game, or you can look at them as you look at different styles of music: mazurkas, waltzes, sonata, et cetera, et cetera. All down the line. Theyre all these different things doing their stuff. And theyre going Be-doo-de-doo-de-doo-de-doo-de-hoo-jee-doo-dee-doo, you know, in different rhythms. And were doing that!  If you were in a flying saucerfrom Mars or somewhereand you came and looked to try and make out what was living on this world, from about 10,000 feet at nightor early morningyou would see these great ganglia with tentacles going out all over the place. And early in the morning you see little blobs of luminous particles going into the middle of them, see? And then, in the late afternoon or early evening, it would spit them all out again. And youd say, Well, this thingthe things breathed. And it does it in a special rhythm. It goes in and out, in and out, in and out, once every 24 hours. But then it rests a day and doesnt spit so much; it spits in a different way. Thats a kind of irregularity, and then it starts spitting all over again in the same way. Youd say, Thats very interesting. Thats the kind of thing we have, see? This is something that goes this way, you see? Just like music goes, Umm-pa-pa, umm-pa-pa, umm-pa-pa, umm-pa-pa. Did you ever see a lady go this way, go that way? Thats what it does.  And when you think a bit about what people really want to do with their time; what do they do when theyre not being pushed around and somebodys telling them what to do? They like to make rhythms. They listen to music, they dance, or they sing, or they do something of a rhythmic nature; playing cards, or bowling, or raising their elbows. Everybody wants to spend their time swinging. Thats the nature of this whole thing were in, you see? It likes to swing. Thats why it does it.  In every tradition theres crazy wisdom. There are the crazy [...] There are the monks laughing at the moon in Zen Buddhism. In Sufism there is a long tradition of that, and one of the best examples is somebody called Naseeruddinthats one of his names. And there are as many stories about Naseeruddin as people can make up. I dont know how many actually happened. But there is a story of Naseeruddin going into a bank to cash a check. It was a large check, and the teller looked at the checkNaseeruddin was a very disreputable-looking fellowand the teller looked at the check, and the check looked alright but Naseeruddin didnt. And finally he said, Well, sir, the check seems fine, but can you identify yourself? And Naseeruddin reached into his pocket, he pulled out a mirror, and he looked, and he said, Yup!  Now, its interesting how subtle and yet how formal our identities are, and how much were attached to them, because of how much we are used to our cards of identity. My name, social security number, my zip code, my address, my occupationa whole set of labels that define who we think we are. When you and I are born, very shortly after were born, we go into somebody-training. We start to be trained to become somebody. And were trained by other people who know who they are, and theyre going to teach us who we arevery well-meaning, I meanso that we can function in the world by being somebody. And you become mothers little girl, or mothers little boy, or somebody who eats all his carrots. You start to develop an identity after a while. Youre good, or youre bad, or youre a rascal, or youre... When I was very youngI was maybe nine or soI came from a jewish middle-class family, and it turned out that the best thing to want to be was a doctor. That was somebody. And everybody gave you microscopes, and books, and patted you, and smiled. And I milked that one until I was well into college and was flunking histology and sitology and embryology until the moment of truth came. And we carry our somebodies around with us, and it allows us to be with other people in an efficient way.  TV Metaphor  Now, just to get us all together into a metaphorical system, we can playin the game of metaphorsany way you want. I mean, it depends on who youre talking to, how you pick your metaphor. But letsIm going to use one that just allows us to jump across systems easily, and if we all talk from the same one itll make it more fun to play. So just imagine you have, next to your eyes, a television channel-selector. And you set the selector on channel one, and you see woman, man, old, young, thin, fat, dark, light. You see the physical beings, you see physical entities; you see endomorphs, ectomorphs, and mesomorphsif youre a scientist. If you are full of lust you would be on this channel. Its a channel on which you would see other bodies as whether or not they would fulfill your fantasies. So you would see everybody as bodies and you would see, theres a potential, theres a competitor, and thats irrelevant. You would see everybody as one of those three. Thats the physical plane; thats what humans see, is channel one. You look at me, you see a 51-year-old bald man, caucasian. And thats what you get on channel one. Probably irrelevant.  Channel 2  Flip to channel two. Minnesota multiphasic personality inventory. Now you see happy and sad, you see seeker, you see responsible, laid backall the social roles. You see responsible teacher. You see judge. You see politician, you see mother, you see child, you see all of these psychological-social dimensions on channel two. If youre in psychotherapy, this is the real channel. Nothing else is real. Now, most of our cards of identity are on those two channels. Channel two is our storyline. Channel two is our psychological storyline, for the most part. Its the world turns, thats what channel two is. You know? Where am I going? Where did I come from? Will I make it? Im lousing it up; if I could only get over thisthats on channel two. Channel twoIm a warm, affable, intelligent, charming teacher.  Channel 3  Channel three is what we call a New-Age channel. Scorpio. On channel three there are only twelve of us. Channel three is also our mythic channelits the archetypes, its the, like, I am the Buddha giving the Sermon of the Deer Park. The room is full, filled with earth-mothers and seekers after the holy grail, and you all have these very big mythic roles also, besides our more paltry psychological selves we like. Bigger games were playing, in the larger warp and woof of things. Now, notice about these first three channels that they are allwhat you might callmatrices of individual differences. Theyre ways we can peg each other. Channel three: Im an Aries. So if you go home and somebody says, Who did you hear this weekend? you can say, I heard a 51-year-old, bald, Caucasian man; warm, charming, affable teacher Aries. Then they know. And you really notice it on the astral plane. They say, What are you? Im an Aries. Right! Of course. As if, now, that explains everything. And each plane up explains more. It actually does, it explains. But its a system, its a matrix of individual differences, in which youre different from you, from you, from you, from me. And we can peg each other. World of individual differences.  Channel 4  Channel four. Now you look into the eyes of another being, and you see another being just like you looking back at you. Are you in there? Far out! Im in here. How did you get into that one? And what you see at that moment is another awareness just like you, but packaged differently. And you see channels one, two, and three as packaging. And this channel four, that entity, isin Christianity its called the soul; the eyes are the windows to the soulso you see another soul just like you, but who is having an entirely different set of life experiences because theyre packaged differently. And you see how much the package affects what their experience is all about. The package includes all the desires, all the fears, all the hopes, all the social perceptions. So if you and I are meeting on channel foursee, its when meeting on channel one, were meeting in Snowmass and Windstar; in a room. When meeting on channel four, were just these souls who happen to be sharing a moment, wondering what were doing on Earth; comparing notes. And the time and space of this is just somewhat incidental to the forms we happen to be meeting in at this moment.  Channel 5  You flip to channel fiveits like two mirrors facing each other. You see yourself looking at yourself looking at yourself. Because on channel five, theres only one of us. Thats Shma Yisrael Adonai Eloheinu Adonai Ead: Hear, O Israel: the Lord is our God, the Lord is One. Its not one plus Dorothy, or one plus Pete. Its just one. So from channel five, we are one in drag, or we are one at play. And if you were the One on channel five, Well, whatll I doyou wouldnt say today, because youre not in today in therebut youd say, Well, whatll I do? I think Ill become Betty. Like, I think Ill play hide-and-seek. Then you become the many, and you bring your awareness down, and you go into a little one of it. I think Ill go into some of them. And then you look out at the rest and say, Oh, God! Scary. And you see others as them, and then you get all scared and you say, Okay, all of you are free, and you come back into the One. Whew, that was heavy. I dont think Ill play that one again.   Channel 6  So from channel five, we are the One at play. And, just to keep the Buddhists happy, we flip to channel six, where you disappear, I disappear, and the channel selector disappears; none of it is, wasits all void.   System  Okay. Now we have a system to play with. Now, when I talk about you being born and going into somebody-training, the somebody-training you specifically went into was primarily channels one and two. And the anxiety that was attendant to the way in which you started to become somebodylet me point out: when you are born you are not busy being separate. Its all one thing to you; its all one undifferentiated thing. And then something along the way comes along, and you start to see that you arent all of it. Now, I dont knowI have a suspicion that my critical moment was when I bit my mothers breast, and she said, Hey, thats not yours! I think thats mine. She pushed me away. There was something that happened where, suddenly, I had a sense that I did something that I fell out of grace. I was no longer at home in the universe; I was a separate entity that felt a yearning to get back. I suck. I eat. I grab. I want. I try to incorporate. I try to come back into the One. I am now a separate entity. I learned separateness somewhere along the way. I bought into my separateness, and the emotional loading with which you do that means that you get very, very concerned about who you are; your identity. And in order to be functional in the worldto be, as a separate entity, to survivebecause you begin to feel theres this vast power around you, and you experience impotence, or inadequacy, or whatever the roots of human neuroses areyou develop a sense of separateness, and there is this vastness, and youre always trying to make it alright to come back in. Whether you come back in through eating, through collecting, through your eyes, drawing in throughlaterthrough all of [the] achievements, through sexuality; always trying to come back into the One, into the unity, into the feeling of being in the Tao, in the harmony of things, in the way of thingsinstead of being separate.  Thinking Mind  And the most powerful vehicle you have on channel two for developing your separateness and your computer system for functioning efficiently as a separate entitywhere Im me and youre youis your thinking mind; your analytic, thinking mind, your conceptual mind. Now, the thinking mind is very addicting, because it gives us so much power. The thinking mind puts us on the Moon, the thinking mind does all these, the thinking mind gives us technology, the thinking mind gives us so much stuff. I grew up learning the statement cogito ergo sumI studied Latin, and it says, I think, therefore I am, meaning you are an identity with your thinking mind. I am the thinker. Like, you wake up in the morning, and from the moment you wake up you start things like, Gotta go to the bathroom. I could sleep five more minutes. Its warm in that corner of the bed. Gotta do the laundry. Wonder if the stove is still hot. Smell coffee. Ooh, Im so sleepy. What was I dreaming about? Gotta go to the bathroom. Wonder if the car will start? And on you start, and you just start. Brrrrrrrrits like a triphammer: Think! Think! Think! Think! Think! Think! Think! And each one is your mind, your awareness isjust imagine your awareness being the light, and its like, Whatll I think? and each throught is coming forth saying, Think of me! Think of me! Im real. Think of me.  Its like that story of the drunk looking for the watch, and somebody comes along to help them, and theyre under a streetlamp, and the fellows are looking, and finally he says, Well, where exactly did you lose the watch? And the drunk points up the alley. Well, what are you looking here for? He says, Because theres a light here. Well, thats the situation: that you end up studying what your thinking mind can know as an object, and everything you cant you say is irrelevant. Well, it turns out most of what we are ends up in the category of irrelevant. Now, most people spend their entire lives with an identity in channels one and two, and its as if they have created a room for themselves with their mind of who I am, and what is me, and what is not me, and how it all is. And then theyno matter how miserable the room isthey will never step out of it. I mean, I get images ofIve seen that photograph in the paper of a battered child whos been burned with cigarette ends by the mother, and just very badly battered. And the child is in the arms of a police matron who looks very motherly, and very loving, and very soft, and shes taking the baby away; and theres the mother, who looks very, very angry, and very bitter and hard. And the baby is screaming for its mother. Its that one.  Separateness  Now if, as is the case for most people, the need of that separateness to be sure it knows where it is, and how it is, and are you my friend or my enemy, and who can I get what from, and is it safe, and where do I go, where dont I gothis map, the map built from the place of my separateness. I am so attached to those identities on channel one and two that all the information that comes to me from channels three, four, five, and six I, in effect, reject. Its all there. You exist on channel one, two, three, four, five, six. Now, this is a model were playing with, and if it gets too far out, just assume I took too many drugs in the sixties or something. Were going to assume the information is coming in on every one of these channels as to who you are. One, two, three, four, five, six. But youre so attached to channels one and two that the other information on these other channels, you treatand the words you use are irrelevant, or error, or I was out of my mind, or I spaced out, or Im losing it, or I dont know what just happened, or like, when I first took psilocybinthe mushroomsand I had these experiences which were like, I experienced that I was perfect. You know, that I was part of the universe and it was all perfect. Well, I know Im not perfect, says channel one and two. So, what I do in order to preserve my model of myself, which is certainly inadequate and not perfect, is I say of that experiencebecause Im a psychologist, you remember; a professor of psychologyI say, Interesting hallucination. Do you see? I have a label. Its called a reductionistic label. Its a label that makes it less than important. Its not real. As my father used to say: Rich, come down to reality! which meant, Get a job! Get your act together on this plane.   Awakening  As William James saidin 1906he said, But most of us do. We say, This is reality, and all the rest of that is... is... la-la-land. Its playing. Its out there, somewhere. But somewhere along the line, for some people, in some birth, there is whats called awakening. What awakening is, is that you acknowledge that channels three, four, five, and sixspecifically: four, five and sixhave some reality to them. You allow that they are potentially real, which means that the channels one and two, which previously you were treating as absolutely real, now are only relatively real. So what you have done in that moment is: you have done to your social perception what Einstein did to Newtonian physics. You learn Newtonian physicsI learned Newtonian physics as, This is absolute truth. And then Einstein came along and said, Depends on where youre standing. He just shifted it from absolute to relative reality. Now, how that awakening occurs for any individual is as varied as there are individuals. When youre ripe for that awakening, a leaf can fallwho knows. See, Iin the sixtieswas part of a club of people who had all awakened through Better Living Through Chemistry. And we would have these club meetings, which wereyou know? I knowand we just reassured each other that we knew. And we all identified the experience we were having with our method. All of the club used to lookthey all used to dress the same way; everybody used to wear white, and they smiled a lot, and they had flowers, and they all smiled, and they knew, you know? Moderate repressed aggression. And at one lecture there was the club, and I was sort of an uncle to the club; my role. And down in the front row there was a woman who was in her late sixties, and she had on a hat that had little strawberries and cherries on it. She had a black patent leather bag, and a print dress, and responsible-looking oxfords. And I would say these things that only those of us that knew would know, and she would go like this. And I became aware of her in the front row, and I thought, How does she know? I mean, shes not an acid-head; theres no doubt about it. So Id say something more esoterically outrageous that only people thatve really been playing out between channels five and six would even think relevant, and shed go: [gestures]. Maybe she has a nervousyou know? And I saw, when Id speak, that she only responded at certain moments. When she did, she only responded when I made a point. And so, at the end of the lecture, I smiled broadly at her and she came over, and she said, Thank you so much, she said, that was justthat felt just right. I understood that perfectly. Thats just the way I understand it to be. How do you know? What is it that youve done that allows you to know these things were talking about? She leaned forward very conspiratorially and she said, I crochet!  And at that moment I sort of knew that the game wasnt the one I thought it was, because until then I had always identified the method of getting somewherewhat you gotwith your method of getting there. And what happens to all of us is: if your method is crocheting, you cant understand why everybody isnt crocheting. Crocheting is the only way, you know? And thats your way. You do it through Zen sitting, you just feel so sorry for those poor slobs that dont sit. How much do you sit? you ask. If yours is skiing you cant believe that other people could be living here and dont ski. If its sexYou mean, you are celibate? You know? Because you cant conceive of it, its just inconceivable that somebody would throw away the ecstasy of transcendance. But yet, when you look around, you see that people arrive at that by a tremendous variety of ways. And you see, when you can separate the method from where the method takes you, you can hear that same quality of delight in a surfer, in a skier, in a sexual aficionado, in a bouillabaisse-cooker, in a cabin-builder, inyou knowin a problem-solver  Einstein Rational Mind  I mean, Einstein just went into ecstatic states. He went into places. He transcended. He went into places; he said, I didnt arrive at my understanding of the fundamental laws of the unvierse through my rational mind. (**) Rational minds in channel two. He went into some other way of knowing the universe. Hes trying to solve a problem about the relation of mass and energy, and hes so one-pointed at it that, just like following the breath, he goes through a doorway into another way of being in the universe in which everything is here. Its a Gestalt-way, its a subjective way; its not object, its not subject-object. The thinking mind always thinks about something. So as long as youre in your thinking mind, youre always one thought away from where the action is. Youre always feeling separate from the universe, because youre always thinking about the universe. You can imagine Bach just having that doorway open into another realm of relationship to the universe where the sound is, where all the laws are, and if you have that doorway open, and then it comes down through you, then you can just sit around writingjust, all you are, really, is copying, in this bizarre sense. I mean, you, as an instrument, are merely a vehicle through which this stuff is coming. And, I mean, somebody like Mozarts outputits not like he sits down and thinks, Well, whatll I do today? All he does is open up, and then the stuff comes through. Its as if you go into this place where all is, its not conceptual, it just all is. And then, as you come back down into formif youre doing it sequentiallyas you come back down into form, if your form happens to be music, it comes out through music. If your form happens to be physics, it comes out through E=mc2. If your form happens to be art, it comes through David, the sculpture of David by Michelangelo.  Altered States  Now when you go into these other altered states of consciousness, as they call itor come into the spirit, if you want it in a religious metaphorthere are things that you see that are very different from the way you see them in whats called normal waking consiousnessso, channel two. Like, when you are looking at the universe from channel fivefrom the way God sees it, just outside of time and spaceyoure just awareness, and its just looking at forms. Looking down or at forms; all form. What you become aware of is that all form is law; is lawfully related; that the nature of form is that it is connected to everything else in a lawful way. Its all changing, and all the change is lawful. And you just see it. You see law every way you look. You can look at it in genetics, you can look at it in quantum mechanics, you can look at it in music, you can look at it in archeology, astronomy, astrology, you can look at it in the Kabbalah, you can look at the I Ching, you can look at it in the Quran, et cetera. Every way you look you see law, and you see everything is related to everything else lawfully, including your body. And when you see all this law related, which includes psychology and sociology, and suffering, and death, and violence, and its all lawful. From that point of view, when you look out and you just see the law, and you say, Its perfect! You see the perfection of the law made manifest. Its all perfect. But then you come back down into your human heart. Perfect? I mean, can you look at the worlddoes it seem perfect to you? The suffering, starvation, violence, paranoia, the fear in people? Look in yourself, look at your own suffering, your own neuroses. Want to call that perfect?  The Paradox of Perfection  Its a paradox; what would be a paradox to the rational mind. A paradox. Perfect? Not perfect. If you buy the reality of your human heart, which empathises, its sure not perfect. If you go up, its perfect. So wouldnt you rather stay in a place where its all perfect? Thats the model of high: lets get high, where its all perfect. Its all perfect. Spilled the Coca-Colaperfect. Somebody falls down in front of you and you say, Karma. Its a very cold place, its a very impersonal place. But its a very safe place. Nuclear bomb may fallright; well, all lawful. Just seeing form, lawfully manifest, wherever you go, and its all just doing perfect.  How to Deal with Suffering  But you see, when you come down at the human level, the amount of suffering is so painfulto see it, to stay open, to keep your heart open to suffering in the worldis so painful that you finally have to close your heart down. Oryou either close your heart down to function down there, or you go up. Those are the, really, two choices you have. You either sort of burn out by the closing down; thats what most nurses and doctors do: they have to face suffering and death each day. Or people who work in things where theres just so much suffering you cant even begin to conceive of ending it. No matter how hard you work, you just close down a little bit; you just close your heart down a little bit. But thats the way it is. You just cant bear it. Or else you go up into that just karma, impersonal thing. Those are the kind of options you have. Because how do you begin, on the human plane, to handle all the suffering? You go to fix that one, put your finger in that hole in the dike, and that ones leaking. And you go to do that one, and that ones leaking. Where do you even begin? And Im sure you are all on the good-guy mailing list just like I am. And I sit with pen poised over checkbook. Well, is it going to be the whales? Is it going to be the battered children? Is it going to be the nuclear movement? Is it going to be the Democratic congressman? Is it going to be the children of Africa? Is it going to be the Cambodian refuge camps? You know? Whos suffering more? And everyone is saying, We are the key one, and you see that you cant possibly deal with all the suffering  Getting High  And for me, for many years, I thought the game was to get high and get rid of my down. Because when I got high I was one with the universe, I felt it was all so clear, it was so light. And all stuff that brought me down I would put over there, and I would divide the world into that which kept me high and that which brought me down. And Id say, Cant go home and visit the folks, they bring me down. I started to have these little categories in life. Cant work in the world; business [and] money brings me down, you know? And it was all these things that bring you down. And I suffered from what you could call vertical schizophrenia. I mean, I even had two names for it: there was Dick Alpert, and there was Ram Dass. And Ram Dass saw everything as love, and everybody as brothers and sisters, and it was all unfolding of the law. And down here is Dick Alpert. He was greedy, lustful, frightened, neurotichuman. But no matter how hard I pushed, Dick Alpert didnt go away. It was as if I theoretically knew that it was all one, but it was all one except for that stuff that I was pushing away. And somewhere along the line in the past ten years I saw that the game was not to get high, the game was to become free. And free meant you werent standing anywhere, and free meant that you had to embrace your lows as well as your highs, and free meant that as long as you pushed away anything, it had you. Its like, the minute you are not doing somethingIm not being Dick Alpertits got you. And when it says that there is nowhere to stand in the spiritual journey it means channel one, two, three, four, five, six. You stand nowhere; theres nowhere where you are not, and theres nowhere where you are.  The Dance  And its an interesting thing that, the quieter you get, and the more you start to hear how it all isincluding yourselfthe less clearly are you manipulative about it. The more you try to hear your part in the dance, and understand the dance has meaningit isnt an error, its not like somebody screwed up. And if somebody hasnt screwed up, it would all be nice now. I mean, its a particular class; that were going through a certain curriculum. Its not the be all, end all. Its a certain strata of reality in which certain kinds of opportunities for certain kinds of experiences are available.  Buddhas Lists  Its like Buddha. When you ask Buddha who we are, Buddha has these wonderful lists. He has five hindrances, hes got ten fetters, hes got 24 no-nos and 52 thiss and thatsI mean, the [???] is full of lists. But just taking the five hindrances to play with. He said who we are: well, weve got lust and greedthats just one, it isnt two; cant say I have one of these but not the otherlust and greed, then, the second one is hatred and ill will, the third one is agitation of mind, fourth are our old friends sloth and torpor, and the fifth one is doubt. Five hindrances.  The Human Curriculum  Now, if you were to set up an intentional community. Say, who will we have in it? Well, lets have people with lust and greed, hatred and ill will, agitation, sloth and torpor, and doubt. What do you think the community would end up like? This! This is it. This is the one we created. And people that have those kinds of attachments of mind taper here. Because this is the place where the sandpapers available to work through those things. Which meansfrom channel four, from a souls point of viewyou now look at your human birth just the way you got it, right now, just the way it is, and realize that you created it. What you are doing on Earth is: you created a program for yourself, you created a curriculum. Its called Human 305, and until you finish that curriculum, youll be sent back again, and again, and again. Like, somebody comes to me and says, I hear youre living in New Mexico nowwhich isnt true, but they say I hear youre living in Santa FeI want to come study with you because I have been living in New York and I cant stand it. And I say, Well, I dont take on students, but in your case Ill make an exception, and your first assignment as my student is to go live in New York for two years.  Because New York is just New York. Its not doing anything. Youre doing it to yourself through New York. New York is merely showing you your own attachments of mind. If theres something that you dont like, or you love, thats in you, thats not out there. It means youre attached to needs, desires, fears, aversions, et cetera.  Getting Caught  When do you lose it that its a curriculum and get caught in the curriculum? When do you get caught in the forms and start to suffer? The minute you are attached to form, you suffer. And the minute you deny form, thats attachment. Do you hear it? You cant grab, you cant push away. You areas the Bible saysyou are in the world but not of the world.  Awakening, Desire, Awareness  And imagine now that you and I have taken birth, specifically, in order to awaken fully, to become free. And that the birth experience, the incarnation, is a series of experiences that weback up, back herehave designed to help us awaken, to confront us with our attachment. You see, you and I each see a world that is a projection of our own attachments. You know this, probably, from psychology. And there is a statement: The truth waits for eyes unclouded by longing. When you want something, you only see what you want. If youre hungry, you just see whats edible. And if you get hungry enough, everything becomes edible. Donner Party, for example. Now, how would it be possible to be in a human birth and still see what is true? You would have to extricate yourself from attachment to your desires. As a separate entity you have desires: youre part of a species that must reproduce, must survive, you have desires to survive, desires to reproduce, you have desires for security and stability, desires for pleasure. Does this mean you have to give up these desires? No. I didnt say that. The game is to extricate your awareness from attachment, or identification, to the desire. Desires go on. Theyre there. The only point is, you are no longer an identity with those desires. You say, Well, I cant imagine how that could be! But youre doing it all the time. Very often, you are performing behavior that is satisfying various needs on your part, and yet your awareness is not caught in being the actor, or being the getter of gratification. And yet, youre doing it. For example, many of you find yourself hurtling through spacehopefully in a carhurtling through space, guiding three, four thousand pounds of metal, making incredibly complex decisions about centrifugal and centripetal force, and inertia, and things like that, all kinds of complex physics laws, and all the time you might be tuning the radio, looking for police, thinking about where youre going, remembering where youve beenyou never even think about thinking about driving. And you knew who you think about driving. And then it goes in what we call base brain, and its just sort of happening. Its a very complex behavior. And you say, Well, driving is one thing. But really, then theres important things Ive got to think about. Is that true? The question is: is there anything in life, is there any drama in life that is so seductive that it pulls you in where you lose your space? Where you lose that part of you that is not identified with the desire? As long as you see life as a set of choices about what it is you want out of life, its very confusing. The moment you can identify with the soul and see life as a curriculum for awakening, then everythingshall I buy a new car or not?well, how does that relate to my souls awakening? And then you seefrom that point of view: should I buy a new car or not?the answer (although most people dont want to hear it) doesnt matter. Because getting the new car is going to face me with certain learning experiences, not getting the car is going to face me with experiences.  Should I Get Divorced  See, people come to me and they say, Should I get divorced or shouldnt I? I mean, they usually come with, Should I get divorced or shouldnt I? you know? Reallythey juiced it up. Now, when I say to them, You know, it doesnt matter, they dont want to hear that at all, because theyre in the world that turns; theyre really in there, they dont want to hear that space at all. But look at it: when youre at a choice point about any action, like, Should I marry or not? The part of you that, if you marry, the part of you that didnt want to marry is going to sit there; its going to still be there. And if you dont marry, the part of you that wanted to marry is going to still be there. So youre going to have to work with that stuff either way, arent you? From a point of view of awakening, youre going to awaken either way. And when you can stand back far enough into this space, you can see that all of your life experiences, independent of what they are, are all learning experiences. Then you say, Well, does it matter at all? Well, from a human point of view, it matters. From a souls point of view it doesnt matter, because youre going to grow through all of it. So from a human point of view you do your best to optimize pleasure, happiness, all the nice things of life. From your souls point of view you take what comes down the pike. And because you have that perspective going simultaneously, youre notif youre just in your human situation and you dont get what you want, youre really bummed out. If, on the other hand, you have this other perspective, you work to get what you want and if you dont... ah, so, work with what I got. And at first you awaken out of your attachments, and then the attachments pull you back in, and then you are back wanting, desiring, fearing, hoping, yearning, et cetera.  Ouspensky and Self-Remembering  And then, as the process goes on, you start to develop that spaciousness of awareness, that presence, that open-heartedness, even as you are having these desires. For a long time, however, a desire will take over your consciousness. Ouspenskywho was one of the students of Gurdjieffwrote a book called In Search of the Miraculous, and he advocated a method called Self-Remembering in which you sort of developed a witness which was another part of you that noticed what you were doing. And he describes how he would experiment with himeslf, and hed say, Ouspensky is setting out for a walk. Ouspensky is walking down the street. Ouspensky is turning left. And he would be very watching, Ouspensky is lifting his left foot. Ouspensky is lifting his right foot. And he was just watching all of it, witnessing it. And then he saw his tobacconists shop, and he remembered he needed pipe tobacco. And he lost it, completely. Two days later, he remembered he was doing an experiment. You know, he just went under, completely, into the desire; the desire just took him over. And I think you can all feel that, you can feel where youre going along very spacious, very free, very loving, very open, and then something comes up that pulls you, completely, into your attachment, your fear, your yearning, yourlike, you go to church and you start to sing, and youre singing, Holy, holy, ho-ly Lord, God almighty, and suddenly it all opens up, and theres the angels and the trumpets and the chariots, and the whole mishpacha are all here, and you look at everybody in the congregation; theyre so beautiful, and theyre my brothers and sisters, you love themyour fourth chakra just openedand you say, Oh, Im never going to change. This isIm always going to feel this way. And it may last until dinner, when somebody else gets the legs. At some moment you pull back into your separateness.  The Process for Awakening  And the process of using your life experiences as a vehicle for awakening is to sit with that process. You babysit this process in yourself, so that you see yourself get stuck, and then you see yourself come up for air, and you begin to notice what it is that sticks you; where youre clining, which things grab your awareness. And very often your awareness will be almost totally grabbed by something, but therell be one little thread. Its like, Ill go into a depression, but theres a little part of me thats saying, Boy, am I depressed!  Now, the part of me thats noticing it isnt depressed, its just noticing. The rest of me is depressed. And I want to make the distinction between what psychologists call dissociation as a mechanism of defense where, because something is so unpleasant, you push it away and stand back from it and you say, Look at all that depression. Doesnt matter to me. Thats different. And thatsoften, spirituality, or what you say Im doing for spiritual reasons, is really a psychodynamic reason. Youre really doing it in order to avoid the pain of living. You go up, or you go into that kind of doesnt matter to me. Im not talking about that. Im talking about what it means to be in the world but not of the world, which means to stay open to the human condition, to your fear, longing, hopes, joys, arousals, depression, loneliness, self-pity, anger, jealousy, and at the same moment, simultaneously, develop a spaciousness that surrounds it. Just like sky surrounds clouds. And what you do at firstto develop an appreciation of that part of you that isnt form, that isnt wanting, yearning, separate, needfulyou do your methods: you do meditation, you do devotion, you do whatever you do. You study, you come to retreats, you do these kind of things. And then, as your faith in that part of you gets stronger, you dont push away your human experiences as much. You dive into them more deeplyuntil, finally, when you look at a Zen monk that is really free, you see somebody that is richly living life. Theyre not, sort of, dallying on the side, sticking a toe in the water. To be in the world but not of the world. If youre going to get the lessons of life, youve got to live life. Because the experiences are the ways you work through the attachments, not by avoiding the experiences. You dont avoid life and get free from it. Life is a series of experiences. Youve got to be in themallow the risk of attachment, and constantly be also connecting to this part that has nothing to do with the attachment. And you see all of your feelings and all of that is happeningit doesnt mean youre not experiencing them. But it means, in addition to experiencing them, you are also cultivating spaciousness.  Why So Serious  There is some quality of release from suffering the minute you can nurture in yourself that little bit of spaciousness. You can call it the cosmic giggle, you can call it anything you want. It has a certain humor to it. The humor that youve taken it all so seriously. I mean, how poignant we are. We get so lost in our melodrama. Are you always riding the waves, or are you sitting like a big tuna down in the ocean? Just sort of sitting there, looking up and saying, Wow! Look! Looking from this place where youre just undulating, undulating in space.  Listening  A medium step in getting to that spaciousnessone of the methods is noticing all this stuff, noticing what catches you, what grabs you, in which you are separating. Part of your consciousness is the noticer and part of it is the desirer. Then, as you get further on, even the noticer disappears and theres just space. Youre not busy self-consciously noticing; theres just spaciousness and the way you do it. Like, Im talking to you? Same moment, Im not talking to you. And if you are quiet enough, if you are busy just being the listener, youre not meeting me in another place where we are just quietly hanging out together, watching the words come and go. And theres a certain type of listening. Like in the Tibetan tradition, Milarepa, the Tibetan yogi, is often pictured with his hand around his ear, listening. Its like you listen your way intoits not listening with your ear, its just... you become an instrument of tuning, in which youre tuning into more and more of what is. Its like becoming part of the Tao, the Way of things.  Selzers Mortal Lessons  And what I want to read [to] you is an example of this. Its from a book called Mortal Lessons by a doctor named Selzer, and these are his words.  On the bulletin board in the front hall of the hospital where I work, there appeared an announcement. Yeshi Dhonden,it read,will make rounds at six oclock on the morning of June 10. The particulars were then given, followed by a notation, Yeshi Dhonden is Personal Physician to the Dalai Lama.I am not so leathery a skeptic that I would knowingly ignore an emissary from the gods. Not only might such sangfroid be inimical to ones earthly well-being, it could take care of eternity, as well.    Thus, on the morning of June 10, I join the clutch of whitecoats waiting in the small conference room adjacent to the ward selected for the rounds. The air in the room is heavy with ill-concealed dubiety and suspicion of bamboozlement.  You can imagine... all these Western doctors.  At precisely six oclock he appears: a short, golden, barrely man, dressed in a sleeveless robe of saffron and maroon. His scalp is shaven, and the only visible hair is a scanty black line above each hooded eye.   He bows in greeting while his young interpreter makes the introduction. Yeshi Dhonden, we are told, will examine a patient selected by a member of the staff. The diagnosis is as unknown to Yeshi Dhonden as it is to us. The examination of the patient will take place in our presence, after which we will reconvene in the conference room, where Yeshi Dhonden will discuss the case. We are further informed that, for the past two hours, Yeshi Dhonden has purified himself by bathing, fasting, and prayer. I, having breakfasted well, performed only the most desultory of ablutions, and given no thought at all to my soul, glance furtively at my fellows. Suddenly, we seem a soiled, uncouth lot.   The patient had been awakened early and told that she was to be examined by a foreign doctor, and had been asked to produce a fresh specimen of urine. So when we enter her room, the woman shows no surprise. She has long ago taken on that mixture of compliance and resignation that is the face of chronic illness. This was to be but another in an endless series of tests and examinations. Yeshi Dhonden steps to the bedside while the rest stand apart, watching. For a long time he gazes at the woman, favoring no part of her body with his eyes, but seeming to fix his glance at a place just above her supine form. I, too, study her: no physical sign nor obvious symptom gives a clue to the nature of her disease.   At last, he takes her hand, raising it in both of his own. Now, he bends over the bed in a kind of crouching stance, his head drawn down into the collar of his robe. His eyes are closed as he feels for her pulse. In a moment he has found the spot, and for the next half hourthe next half hourhe remains thus, suspended above the patient like some exotic golden bird with folded wings, holding the pulse of the woman beneath his fingers, cradling her hand in his. All the power of the man seems to have been drawn down into this one purpose. It is palpitation of the pulse raised to the state of ritual. From the foot of the bed where I stand, it is as though he and the patient have entered a special place of isolation; of apartness, about which a vacancy hovers and across which no violation is possible.   After a moment, the woman rests back upon her pillow. From time to time, she raises her head to look at the strange figure above her, then sinks back once more. I cannot see their hands joined in a correspondence that is exclusive, intimate; his fingertips receiving the voice of her sick body through the rhythm and throb she offers at her wrist.   All at once, I am enviousnot of him, not of Yeshi Dhonden for his gift of beauty and holinessbut of her. I want to be held like that, touched so, received. And I know that I, who have palpitated a hundred thousand pulses, have not felt a single one.   At last, Yeshi Dhonden straightens, gently places the womans hand upon the bed, and steps back. The interpreter produces a small wooden bowl and two sticks. Yeshi Dhonden pours a portion of the urine specimen into the bowl, proceeds to whip the liquid with the two sticks. This he does for several minutes until a foam is raised. Then, bowing above the bowl, he inhales the odor three times, he sets down the bowl, and turns to leave. All this while he has not uttered a single word.   As he nears the door, the woman raises her head and calls out to him in a voice at once urgent and serene. Thank you, doctor. Thank you, she says, and touches with her other hand the place he had held on her wrist, as though to recapture something that had visited there. Yeshi Dhonden turns back for a moment to gaze at her, then steps into the corridor. Rounds are at an end.   We are seated once more in the conference room. Yeshi Dhonden speaks now, for the first time, in soft Tibetan sounds that I have never heard before. He has barely begun when the young interpreter begins to translate. The two voices continuing in tandema bilingual fugue, the one chasing the other. It is like the chanting of monks. He speaks of winds coursing through the body of the woman, currents that break against barriers, eddying. These vortices are in her blood, he says. The last spendings of an imperfect heart. Between the chambers of her heart, long, long before she was born, a wind had come and blown open a deep gate that must never be opened. Through it charge the full waters of her river, as the mountain stream cascades in the springtime, battering, knocking loose the land, and flooding her breath. Thus he speaks, and is silent.   May we now have the diagnosis? a professor asks.   The host of these rounds, the man who knows, answers. Congenital heart disease. Interventricular septal defect, with resultant heart failure.   A gateway in the heart, I think, that must not be opened. Through it charge the full waters that flood her breath.   So here, then, is the doctor, listening to the sounds of the body to which the rest of us are deaf. He is more than doctor, he is priest.  Once you can appreciate that there are other parts of your being from which the universe is heard differently, and that when you rest in these other parts of your being, you hear clearly and can then understand the meaning of your manifestation and how to function within it, then the sense you adopt is of someone who is listening. Tuning. Its like tuning an instrument. Youre tuning and listening, tuning and listening to what is; to what is. I wonder if its ever struck you how curious a thing it is that most of the things that we experience we regard as things that happen to us, which we ourselves do not originate, which are events expressing some sort of power or activity that is external to ourselves. And if you consider that, you realize that what you mean by yourself is rather narrowly circumscribed. Even events that go on in our own bodies are put in the category of things that happen to us in the same way as things that go on in the world outside our skins. If theres a thunderstorm or an earthquakewell, it happens to you; youre not responsible for it. But so, in the same way, when you have hiccups you didnt plan on it. If you have belly rumbles, you had no intention of doing it. And as for the catastrophic act of getting born well, you had nothing to do with that. And you can spend all your life blaming your parents for putting you in the situation in which you find yourself.  And this way of looking at the world in this sort of passive moodas something that happens to yougoes right down to our general feeling about life. It goes down to the way in which, as Westerners, we have been accustomed to look at human existence as a precarious event in a cosmos that, on the whole, is depicted as being completely unsympathetic and alien to our existence. In other words, if youre reared with a 20th centuryor, shall we say, an early 20th centurycommon sense (which is based on the philosophy of science of the 19th century with its rejection of Christianity and Judaism), you regard yourself as an accidenta biological accidentin a stupid universe which is mechanical but has no feelingsno finer feelings. A vast, pointless gyration of radioactive rocks and gas in which you happen to occur.  Of course, if you dont have that point of view and you are more traditional, you look upon yourself as a child of God and therefore under authority. In other words, theres a big boss on top of all this who allowed you, at his pleasure, to deign to have the disgusting effrontery to exist, and you better watch your Ps and Qs because that Almighty is looking after you with the attitude of this is going to hurt me more than its going to hurt you.  And when you look at the world in that imageor in the other image that its a stupid mechanismeither point of view you take, you dont really belong. Youre not really part of all this. And I could use a stronger word than part, only we dont have it in English. We have to say something like connected with it, essential to it. Or, to put it in the strongest possible way, it is quite alien to Western thought to conceive that the external worldwhich is defined as something that happens to you, and your body itself is something that you got caught up withit is quite alien to our thought to consider all that as you, yourself. Because you see, we have such a myopic view of what ones self is. Its as if, in other words, we selected how much experience is really to be regarded as me, as if you focused your attention on certain restricted areas of the whole panorama of things that you experience and say I will take sides with that much of it.  Now, we come hereright at the startto an extremely important principle, which is the different points of view you get when you change your level of magnification. That is to say, you can look at something with a microscope and see it a certain way, you can look at it with a naked eye and see it in a certain way, you look at it with a telescope and you see it in another way. Now, which level of magnification is the correct one? Well, obviously, theyre all correct, but theyre just different points of view. You can, for example, look at a newspaper photograph under a magnifying glass and where, with the naked eye, you will see a human face, with a magnifying glass you will just see a profusion of dots rather meaninglessly scattered. But as you stand away from that collection of dots, which all seem to be separate and apart from each other, they suddenly arrange themselves into a pattern. And you see that these individual dots add up to some kind of sense.  Now youll see at once, from this illustration, that maybe youwhen you take a myopic view of yourself, as most of us dobut you may add up to some kind of sense that is not apparent to you in your ordinary consciousness. When we examine our bloodstreams under a microscope we see theres one hell of a fight going on. All sorts of microorganisms are chewing each other up. And if we got overly fascinated with our view of our own bloodstreams in the microscope we should start taking sides, which would be fatal. Because the health of our organism depends on the continuance of this battle. What is, in other words, conflict at one level of magnification is harmony at a higher level. Now could it possibly be, therefore, that wewith all our problems, conflicts, neuroses, sicknesses, political outrages, wars, tortures and everything that goes on in human lifeare a state of conflict which can be seen in a larger perspective as a situation of harmony?  Well, it is claimed, you see, that some human beings have broken through to that vision. That they slipped, somehow or other, into states of consciousness where they see the apparent disintegration and disorganization of everyday life as the functioning of a totality which, at its level, is completely harmonious. And you could say, A-ha, at last, I see. I got the point. Ive seen how all this makes sense. But what this insight depended upon was your overcoming the illusion that space separates things. That is to say the spacethe interval between your body and mine, the interval created by birth at one end and death at the other, and then after somebodys death, then somebody elses birththese are events with intervals between them. And normally we regard these intervals in time and these intervals in space as having no importance, no function.  We tend to see the universe itself as really consisting in all the stars and galaxies. Thats what it is, thats what we notice. But the space in which all this happens is sort of written off as something that isnt really there. But what one has to realize is that the space is an essential function of the things in the space. After all, you cant have separate stars unless there is a space around them. Eliminate the space and you would see you couldnt have this phenomenon at all. And vice versa: you couldnt have the spaceit wouldnt be there in any sense whatsoeverif there werent the bodies in it. So the bodies in the space and the space are two aspects of a single continuum. Theyre related together in exactly the same way as a back and a front, and you just dont get one without the other.  So the moment you see that intervalsthat spaceis connective, you can understand at once how you are not just to be exclusively defined as a flash of consciousness that occurs between two eternal darknesses, which is the popular common-sense view which Western man has of his own life: that you consider that in the darkness that comes before your birth there was no you, and in the eternal darkness that follows your death there is, likewise, no you. And Im going to discuss these matters not by appealing to any special, spooky knowledgeas if I had been traveling on the higher planes and knew all my previous incarnations, and therefore could tell you authoritatively that you are much more than this individuality. Im going to do it on a basis of complete common sense that everybody has access to the facts, and that just what you have to realize is that life is a pattern of immense complexity, and what you call yourself, as a living organismsay, I am my whole body, at the very leastnow what is that body? That body is recognizable, and I recognize my friends when I meet them again (with luck), and you recognize me. Although, the last time any of you saw me, I was absolutely something entirely different from what I am now; just as the flame of a candle is never a constant. A flame of a candle is a stream of hot gas. Only, you say the flame of the candle as if it were a constant. Well, it is a recognizably constant pattern: the spear-shaped outline of the flame and its coloration is a constant pattern. But in exactly the same way, we are all constant patterns, and thats all we are; the only thing constant about us at all is the doing rather than the being. Its the way we behave, the way we dance; only theres no we that dances, theres just the dancing. Just as the flame is the streaming of hot gas, just as a whirlpool in a river is a whirling of streaming water. There is no thing that whirlpools, there is the whirlpool.  And in the same way, each one of us is a very, very delightfully complex undulation of the energy of the whole universe. Only, by process of mis-education weve been deprived of the knowledge of that factnot as if there was someone to blame for this because its always with our own tacit consent. Because life is, basically, a game of hide-and-seek. Because life is pulsation: on and off, here it is and now it isnt. And by being this pulsation, we know its there. See, you dont know what you mean by on unless you know what you mean by off. Thats why, when we want to awaken someone, we knock at the door. Its not enough to slam the door once with your fist and make this big noise, but you keep up a pulsation. Because that, by its on-and-off-ness, attracts attention.  All life, you see, is this flickering in and out. Only, there are enormous rhythms in it. There are very fast flickering ins and outs like the reaction of light upon our eyes, such that when I take a lighted cigarette in the dark and I spin it, you will see a circle of fire. Because the reflection of that cigarette tip on your retina lasts; it endures, just in the same way as on a radar screen an image stays a little while until its revivified by another round. So in that way, you see, you notice continuity. And in the same way, then, you notice the continuity of a light. Because although, like, say, with an arc lampan arc lamp is actually a flickering light, and thats why they dont allow arc lights to be used in any shop where theres a circular saw moving: because sometimes the flickering speed of the arc light so synchronizes with the turning speed of the teeth on the blade, that the teeth look as if theyre not moving, and so anybody who might put his hand on the blade will have it chopped off thinking it was a still one.  So, in this way, very fast impulses are looked upon as constant. And we seewhere there are fast impulsesa solid thing. When you look at the blade of a propeller or an electric fan, the separated four or three blades become a solid disk and you cannot throw an egg through it. Well, so in exactly the same way, you cant put your finger through a rock because the rock is moving too fast for your finger to go through. Thats the meaning of the whole phenomenon of hardness. Hardness in nature is immense energy, but acting in a very concentrated space; restricted space, but going to beat hell. Thats why you cant get through it.  Now, from those very tiny fast rhythms, which give us the impression of continuity, there are alsoin this universeimmensely slow rhythms, and these are very difficult for us to keep track of. And they impress us and depress us as our own life and death, as our coming and going which goes for what isto ussuch a slow pace that we cant possibly believe that it is really a rhythm. We think of it as our birth, as something quite unique that could never occur again, because were so close to it, you see? And its moving so slowly. And so, with that point of view, we are like Marshall McLuhan has saidhe borrowed a metaphor from mewhich is that we are driving a car looking at the rear-vision mirror. That means that the environment in which you believe yourself to exist is always a past one, it isnt the one youre actually in. The process of growth, the basic process of biology, is one in which lower orders are always being superseded by higher orders. But the lower order can never figure outor only very rarely figure outwhat the higher order is thats taking over, and may see it as a terrible threat; as total disaster, as the very end. But [it] can never be aware that the principle of growth always has, and always will, continue. Because thats whats going on. But you never know what the next step is going to be, because if you did know you wouldnt take itbecause it would already be past. Do you understand this? That any certainly known future is an event of which we can say youve had it, and in that sense its past.  When we play at games, and wesay, in chess, or in bridge, or whatever game youre playingthe outcome of the game becomes certain, we at that point cancel the game and begin a new one. Because the whole zest of the thingand which takes me back to the idea that this whole thing is a hide-and-seek gameis that you dont know what the next order coming up is. But one thing you can be sure of: it will be an order, and it will comprehend you.  At the moment we stand at a time in history where were beginning to think of the great countdown on the end of the human race. Terrifying possibility that, through atomic energy, we may obliterate this planet and turn the whole globe into a star. Maybe thats the way all the stars started. Imagine, you know, this great thing coming up; the countdown on the end: seven, six, five, four, three, two, one, PEEEEERRRRRRRRRUUMMMMM! Ssshhhhhhhhhwshwshwshwshwwww POOOSSSSHHHHH! Ssshhhhwwwwwrrrhhh POOSSSHHHH! Where have you heard that before? You sit on the seashore and you hear the waves going in and out. And you dont stop to think. Thats what youre doing. Thats what the whole business is doing. And there are places where the wave mounts and mounts, and it gets too big for its boots or whatever, and it spills and breaks. We could do just that. But very important to realize that thats what youre doing because then you dont get panicky about it. And the person whos going to press that button is the person whos going to be in panic.  So if you realize that thats what it is and that it doesnt really matter if the whole human race blows itself up, then theres a chance that it wont do it. Thats the only chance we have. Not to do this thing, which attracts us like a kind of vertigo, like a person who looks over a precipice and is all set to throw himself over, or a person who jumps out of a plane when theyre skydiving and forgets to pull the parachute ring because he gets fascinated with a target. Its called target fascination; you just go straight at it, you see? So we can get absolutely fascinated with disaster, with doom. Allyou knowall the news in the newspapers is invariably bad news. There is no good news in the newspaper. People wouldnt buy a newspaper consisting of good news. Even the free press is full of terrible news. Except the San Francisco Oracle. And the fascination, you see, for this doom might be neutralized if we would say, Well, why bother about that? Its just another fluctuation in this huge, marvelous, endless chain of our own selves and our own energy going on.  See, heres the problem: because of our myopia, because of the way weve restricted consciousness to focus upon just that certain little area of experience that we call voluntary actionthats usand everything else happens to us. Now, thats obviously absurd. Lets suppose you take in your hand one of those toysa gyroscopic topand you suddenly notice, the minute you get this in your hand, that it has a kind of vitality to it. It seems to resist you, it starts pushing you in a certain way, see? And sometimes youre with it and following it, and then sometimesyou see, its just as if you held a living animal in your hand. You know, you pick up a hamster, you know, or a guinea pig, and you hold this little thing in your hand and its always trying to escape. So the gyroscope always seems to be trying to escape your hold. Now, in exactly the same way, what youre experiencing all the time: all sorts of things are getting out of control and doing things you dont expect. Its trying to escape your hold. Alright, then dont grab it so hard! And you discover that this living thing that youre feelinglike the gyroscope topits your own life. Because you can see very simply that you would not understand the experience that you call voluntary action and decision, being in control and being yourself, unless in opposition to that there were something else. You couldnt realize self and control and will unless there were something other, out of control, and instead of will, wont! Its the two, together only, that produces the sensation that you call having a personal identity.  Only, there is a funny thing about human consciousness which has been worked out very carefully in Gestalt psychology, which is that our attention is captured by the figure rather than the background, by the relatively enclosed area rather than the diffuse area, and by something moving rather than what is relatively still. And to all those phenomena thatin this wayattract our attention, we attribute a higher degree of reality than the ones we dont notice. Thats only because, for the moment, those are more important to us. Consciousness, you see, is a radar that is scanning the environment to look out for trouble just in the same way as a ships radar is looking for rocks or other ships. And the radar, therefore, does not notice the vast areas of space where there are no rocks, no other ships. So, in the same way, our eyesor rather, the selective consciousness behind the eyesonly pays attention to what we think is important.  I am at this moment aware of all of you in this room, of every single detail of your clothing, of your faces and so on, but Im not noticing it all. And therefore I will not be able to remember tomorrow exactly how each one of you looked and what you were wearing. Because what I notice is restricted to things that I think are particularly important. If I notice some particularly beautiful girl in the audience, then I might notice also what shes wearing, and that would be memorable. But by and largeyou seewe scan things over, but we pay attention only to what our set of values tells us we ought to pay attention to. And so, in this way, we have this rather myopic way of looking at things and we screen outfrom attentionanything that is not immediately important to a scanning system based on sensing danger. But, quite obviously, youas a complete individualare much more than this scanning system. You are in relationships with the external world that, on the whole, are incredibly harmonious.  Going back to this illustration of every living body as something like the flame of a candle: the energies of lifein the form of temperature, light, air and food, and so onare streaming through you all at this moment in the most magnificently harmonious way. And youreall of youfar more beautiful than any candle flame. Just sitting in these chairs; just zzzhwwwwt: going, you know? Only, were so used to it we say about that, So what? Show me something interesting. Show me something new. Because its a characteristic of consciousness that it ignores stimuli that are constant. When anything is constant it says, Okay, thats safe. Its in the bag. Neednt pay attention to that anymore. And therefore we eliminatesystematically, from our awarenessall the gorgeous things that are going on all the time, and instead only become focused on the troublesome things that might happen to upset it. Which is alright, but we make too much of it and become we make so much of it that we identify our very selvesI, egowith the radar; with the troubleshooter. And thats only [a] tiny fragment of ones total being.  So that if you do become aware that you are not simply that scanning mechanism, but you are your complete organism, thenvery swiftly in turn; as a consequence of thatyou become aware that your organism is not the way you think about it when you look at it from the standpoint of conscious attention, from the standpoint of the ego. From the standpoint of the ego, your organism is yourkind ofvehicle, your automobile, in which you go around. But from a physical point of view, your organism is, again, like the candle flame or the whirlpool: it is something which is a continuous patterningor activityof the whole cosmos.  The key idea here is pattern. Lets supposeIm going to borrow a metaphor from Buckminster Fullersuppose we have a rope, and one section of this rope is made of manila hemp, the next section is cotton, the next section is silk, the next section is nylon, and so on. Now we tie a knot in this ropejust an ordinary one-over knotand you find, by putting your finger in the knot, you can move it all the way down the rope. Now as this knot travels, its first of all made of manila hemp, its then made of cotton, its then made of silk, its then made of nylon, and so on. But the knot keeps going on. Thats the integrity of pattern; the continuing pattern, which is what you are. Because you might, you know, befor several yearsyou might be a vegetarian, and you might be a meat-eater, and so on. And, you know, your constitution changes all the time, but your friends still recognize you because youre still putting on the same show. Its the same pattern that is the recognizable individual.  But we are trained in our language. The very structure of the language we talk deceives us into misunderstanding this, because when we see a pattern we ask, Whats it made of? Like, you see a table: is it made of wood or is it made of aluminum? But then, when you inquire into what is wood and how does wood differ from aluminum, the only thing a scientist can tell you is the different patternsthat is to say, the different molecular structure of the two things. And the molecular structure is not a description of what something is made of, it is a description of what dance it is performing, what motions, what kind of a symphony this is. Because, basically, all phenomena of life are musical, and gold differs from lead in exactly the same way that a waltz differs from a mazurka: its a different dance. And there isnt any thing thats dancing.  That is a deception we get into because we have two parts of speech in our grammar: we have nouns and verbs. And verbs are supposed to describe the activities of nouns. And this is simply a convention of speech. You could have a language with only verbs in it; you dont need any nouns. Or you could also have a language with nouns only and no verbs, and it would perfectly adequately describe whats going on in the world. So if you were used to speaking with a language that had one part of speech, you could say just as much as we can with two and be a lot cleareronly: at first it would sound awkward, but youd soon get used to it. And then, when you got used to it, it would be a matter of common sense that the patterning of the world is not some kind of stuff thats patterning; you dont have to seek for a substance underlying the whole thing, its just patterning! And were all that.  And so, in this way, there isto a person who really wakes upyou very soon realize that your existence is not something that is just the hopeless little creature thats suddenly confronted with a great big external world that goes GAAAH! at ityou know?and eats him up. Every tiniest little thing that comes into beingevery minute little fruit fly or gnat or bacteriumI will go so far as to say is an event upon which this whole cosmos depends. Because this thing goes both ways: its not only that every little organism which exists depends on its total environment. The reverse is also true: that the total environment depends on each and every one of those little organisms. So that you could say this universe consists of an arrangement of pattern in which every event is essential to the whole thing.  Now, we screen that idea out of our consciousness in exactly the same way that we screen out the perception of space as an important reality. Just as we pay attention to the figure and ignore the background, so we see one way of looking at things: mainly, that the organism is very frail against the environment. It lasts a long timethe environmentbut the organism only lasts a short time. What do you mean, the environment lasts a long time? What does the environment consist of? Just a lot of little things. And yet, there is the environment just as the same way as there is the face in the newspaper photograph behind all those little dots. When you get far enough away from it you see the face. When you get far enough away from all the organisms and the little bits of things you see the environment in another scale of magnification. But actually, the whole thing is arranged in a polar system where the enormous depends on the tiny and the tiny depends on the enormous, and you get a relationship between these extremes which can be called a transaction. That is to say, a transactionwhen theres buying and selling, its impossible to have buying without selling and selling without buying.  So you alwayswherever you are looking at the general panorama of sensory experience, try switching. Try shifting your attention to all the things you thought were unimportantto the constants, to the backgroundand begin looking at the spaces between people. All painters have to learn this, becauseespecially if youre working in oilsyou actually have to paint in the background. Weavers know this because when they are making patterns in weaving theyve got to weave the background as well. Or if you do needlepoint with embroidery, think of the hours you spend putting in the background over the canvas in wool. And you become aware of it. Same way that people have made the great oriental carpets. Theyre much more aware of the background as constituting an essential part of the total experience.  So as you become aware of this you see the same thing that you notice in music, namely that it is only as a result of hearing the interval between tones that you hear any melody. If you dont hear the interval youre tone deaf, and all notes are the same noise; all you hear is rhythm if you dont hear any melody. Youve got to hear the interval. So then: watch the intervals between people, the things that arent said, the things that are tacit, the things that are implicit rather than explicit in all life. And then you begin to get connected. You know, its very important to have a connection in life and to be in the know. And this is the way it fundamentally comes out of seeing the thing you forgot.  You know, you can always bug people in a beautiful wayin a very helpful wayby just saying to them, What did you forget? They say, Well, I dont know. Was I supposed to remember? Im really not trying to put you on. I mean, its not difficult; this is something completely obvious that you forgot. Youll easily remember it because its so obvious. Well, thats the hardest thing in the world to think of. Whats the most obvious thing I forgot? Huh, whats that? Well, who do you think you are? Well, how do you answer that question, Who are you? Well, you give a name. You say, Im Joe Dokes, Im Alan Watts. Thats not true. Thats what people told you you were. They put that name on you and they taught you to identify with it and to behave as it was expected to behave. But thats not who you are. You know very well. Go back in your memory, go back into your infancy before they started telling you all this stuff. Who are you? And if you get with that youll know very well who you are: the jolly old ancient of days.  Only: theres a conspiracy that you mustnt let on about that because everybody is. And if one person realizes it, the other is a little bit offended and will say, Well, how come youre so great? We worked it in Christianity by a very clever thing: of allowing just one individual to be recognized as the God incarnate, and nobody else, therefore, could be. And since he had been safely crucified and whisked up to heaven, he wouldnt bother us anymore. So everybody, therefore, who gets an intimation of who they really are and ever comes out with itin Christian civilizationpeople say, Who the hell do you think you are? Youre Jesus Christ? Well, you say, Jesus Christ said he was Jesus Christ and everybody put him down for it, and thats what youre doing to me. Oh, they say, forget that one. Because thats like somebody comes out and composes some perfectly terrible music, and the critics say, This man is a cacophonist, he is completely incompetent. And he said, Did you read the reviews of Beethovens First Symphony when it was performed at Vienna?  Now, the thing is: we allowed one person, you seeone human individualto be the incarnate God, because we have all been living in a theory of the universe in which the individual is simply involved in something that happens to him. And we feel that this thing that happens to us is reality, it is facts that we have to face and accept and cope with. See? Its always something other than you. You dont recognize it as an integral part of your own being without which you cannot know what you mean by the word I. But in the truth of the matter is, though, that if you will face it out, every single one of us knows that that isnt true. There is, as it were, a recess of the soulof the psychewhere everybody knows perfectly well that you are not just this irresponsible little mouse thats been chucked down into this world, but that you are really doing this work. Youre running it.  Only: you cant admit it just in the same way as you cant admit that youre responsible for the way your own heart beats. You say, Oh thats not my doing. Ive no control over my heart. Do you have any control over being conscious? Do you know how you will? When you say, I intend to take my hand down from my face and put it on my legI can do that, but I dont know how the hell its done. So that what we mean by the capacity of voluntary controlin the ordinary sense of the wordwe dont understand it at all! So you might say, in a funny backwards way, that the only kind of control you really understand is that where youre not using your will because you just do it. So easy, like you open and close your hand. You know how to do it? Sure you know how to do it. But you cant put it into words and explain to someone how to do it. You say, Well, come on. Arent you human? Dont you know how to open and close your hand? Just do it, silly!  But we dont realize, you see, that just as we know how to do this, we know equally well how to turn the Sun into light, how to blue the sky, how to blow the wind, how to wave the ocean, how to digest food. And, I might add, to be digestedby bacteriaand transformed. As we transform our steaks we will, in turn, be transformed. But the pattern keeps going. And its always you. Only, you see, you have this marvelous capacity to transform yourself without knowing that youre doing it. Therefore, you keep surprising yourself, and therefore you keep on doing it. Because if you didnt surprise yourself you wouldnt go on doing it. Its just the very fact, you see, that you seem to be the victims of a thing you dont understand, and that you seem to conclude your life every time in a wipeout called deathwhere all your control goesits just exactly that opposite condition to what you call being alive that allows you to be alive! Only: every time it happens its like its new. Its like every time youre born it seems like it was the only time. But, of course, if it wasnt like that you wouldnt do it.  When Hindus and Buddhists use the word karma, the basic meaning of it is action; from the Sanskrit root kri: to do. And therefore there is some error in the common translation of karma as a law of cause and effect, or of cosmic retribution. As a man sows, so also shall he reap has a Western flavor which is a little causal. The way the Buddha put it was slightly different: This arises, that becomes. Because between this and that there is a polar relationship, and the full explanation of karma in Buddhist philosophy is called prattyasamutpda, which means the interdependent origination of all the forms and phases of life. Prattyasamutpda.  And there are twelve links, shall we say, in the chain of interdependent origination constituting a circle. And the existence of the circle depends on the presence of every one of the links. From one point of view in Buddhism, the chain of interdependent origination is looked upon as a chain, that is to say, as a form of bondage. The constituents, as it were, of the vicious circle in which most people and beings are living, which they call sasra: the round of birth and death; the bhavacakra: the wheel of bhava, which is becoming. And so, going round and round and round in the endless game of hide-and-seek is, from one point of view, bondage. Bondage to karma.  And if you study the Bhagavad Gitawhich is not a Buddhist book, but a Hindu scriptureKrishna, the spokesman of the Gita, explains that the wise man is one who does what is called nikmakarma, meaning passionless activity in the sense that he acts without seeking a result, without being motivated by the fruits of action, and therefore is not bound by his own action. You can be bound to sasrathe wheel of birth and deathby iron chains or gold chains. The chains areI mean, Im talking more or less in the language of popular Hinduismthat if you do bad deeds in this life youll get [a] bad result next time. If you do good deeds in this life you may be reborn as an angel or as a monk, in which youll get a better chance of liberation. But still: so long as youre looking for resultsbe they good or evilyoure still bound.  Now, the way in which one becomes, as it were, free of karma involves another Buddhist point of view which is a kind ofa different way of looking at the chain of interdependent origination. Its the way which the Japanese call jiji muge (), that is to say, the mutual interpenetration of all things and events. So that you could say that, actually, in fact, the deepest level of realitythis entire cosmosis a completely harmonious and blissful manifestation of everything in a state of total enlightenment and mutual compassion. And therefore the task of the Buddhist or the Hindu discipline of meditation, the sdhanthe way of spiritual developmentis to realize that; for everybody to realize it effectively in his own life, and therefore cease from the illusion that the universe is a fragmented process of conflict.  But first of all, we have to be clear about karma: that it is not to be understood in the Western sense of a law of cause and effect, or of a sort of retribution system, or a law. The word law is most unsuitable for concepts in Eastern Indian and Chinese philosophy. The word dharmasometimes meaning the Buddhists doctrine, or a certain way of life when you talk about a persons svadharmayou mean their own function. We would translate svadharma as vocation. Sva is the same as the Latin sus: ones own. Dharma: function, in this case. Operation, way of life, style of life, profession, trade, role. It means all those things. And the one thing that dharma really never means is law, although its often translated that way.  Because you see, you dont get the idea of law until you move to a culture where order is based on the idea of obedience. In the West, you see, the origins of law spring from where? The laws of the Medes and Persians, the Laws of Hammurabi, the Laws of Moses, and later Roman law. The only healthy legal tradition we have in the West is British common law, which proceeds in an entirely different way from code law.  Because, you see, the difference between code law and common law is that code law is laid down by the wisdom of an all-powerful ruler who tells everybody how they must behave, and they must obey him. But common law is evolved by discussion of particular cases rather than referring all the time to abstract principles which are put down in words. And the judgethe good judgeis a wise man, a man with a sense of equity and fair play who arbitrates an issue which is debated in front of him. And from the precedent from which he creates by his decision, common law evolves. You see, thats a more organic way of producing law. The code law system, which we inherit from our most ancient theological backgrounds, is a tyrannical method of law by imposition.  And so you must understand thatin both Hinduism and Buddhismthere is really no fundamental idea of obedience to a personal ruler. Certainly not in Buddhism. A little bit, sometimes, in Hinduism. But even then we get terribly mixed up because, for example, I was talking of the Bhagavad Gita: this is often translated The Lords Song. Now, for Bhagavn (or Bhagavt in Sanskrit) Lordas an English equivalentis quite inappropriate. Because a lord is one who lords it over you. Bhagavn is a title of reverence and respect and love. The Song of the Beloved would be much better, in a wayalthough its not quite correct from a strict point of view. We dont really have an equivalent for this word, the Bhagavn.  So although, you see, there has beenin India itselftyrannical rule, and although the Arthastra (as a manual of politics) gives directions to a tyrant as to how to govern by absolute power, going along with this exposition of this very Machiavellian point of view to government is the constant advice of the sage: yes, this is what you have to do in order to fulfill your office as a ruler, but never forget that youll never succeed. The more you try to rule things by force, the more you will stir up violence against you. And so you can never hold on to your power and your possessions; it will always flow away from you. So there was one of those great rajas of ancient India who asked a jeweler to make him a ring that would restrain him in prosperity and support him in adversity. And the jeweler wrote on the ring: It will pass.  But when we come to the deep cosmological and metaphysical ideas, we dont have law in the Western sense, and therefore nature is not looked upon as something which is an orderly system because it is obeying a commandment. 1    The tao that can be told  is not the eternal Tao  The name that can be named  is not the eternal Name.The unnamable is the eternally real.  Naming is the origin  of all particular things.Free from desire, you realize the mystery.  Caught in desire, you see only the manifestations.Yet mystery and manifestations  arise from the same source.  This source is called darkness.Darkness within darkness.  The gateway to all understanding. 2    When people see some things as beautiful,  other things become ugly.  When people see some things as good,  other things become bad.Being and non-being create each other.  Difficult and easy support each other.  Long and short define each other.  High and low depend on each other.  Before and after follow each other.Therefore the Master  acts without doing anything  and teaches without saying anything.  Things arise and she lets them come;  things disappear and she lets them go.  She has but doesnt possess,  acts but doesnt expect.  When her work is done, she forgets it.  That is why it lasts forever. 3    If you overesteem great men,  people become powerless.  If you overvalue possessions,  people begin to steal.The Master leads  by emptying peoples minds  and filling their cores,  by weakening their ambition  and toughening their resolve.  He helps people lose everything  they know, everything they desire,  and creates confusion  in those who think that they know.Practice not-doing,  and everything will fall into place. 4    The Tao is like a well:  used but never used up.  It is like the eternal void:  filled with infinite possibilities.It is hidden but always present.  I dont know who gave birth to it.  It is older than God. 5    The Tao doesnt take sides;  it gives birth to both good and evil.  The Master doesnt take sides;  she welcomes both saints and sinners.The Tao is like a bellows:  it is empty yet infinitely capable.  The more you use it, the more it produces;  the more you talk of it, the less you understand.Hold on to the center. 6    The Tao is called the Great Mother:  empty yet inexhaustible,  it gives birth to infinite worlds.It is always present within you.  You can use it any way you want. 7    The Tao is infinite, eternal.  Why is it eternal?  It was never born;  thus it can never die.  Why is it infinite?  It has no desires for itself;  thus it is present for all beings.The Master stays behind;  that is why she is ahead.  She is detached from all things;  that is why she is one with them.  Because she has let go of herself,  she is perfectly fulfilled. 8    The supreme good is like water,  which nourishes all things without trying to.  It is content with the low places that people disdain.  Thus it is like the Tao.In dwelling, live close to the ground.  In thinking, keep to the simple.  In conflict, be fair and generous.  In governing, dont try to control.  In work, do what you enjoy.  In family life, be completely present.When you are content to be simply yourself  and dont compare or compete,  everybody will respect you. 9    Fill your bowl to the brim  and it will spill.  Keep sharpening your knife  and it will blunt.  Chase after money and security  and your heart will never unclench.  Care about peoples approval  and you will be their prisoner.Do your work, then step back.  The only path to serenity. 10    Can you coax your mind from its wandering  and keep to the original oneness?  Can you let your body become  supple as a newborn childs?  Can you cleanse your inner vision  until you see nothing but the light?  Can you love people and lead them  without imposing your will?  Can you deal with the most vital matters  by letting events take their course?  Can you step back from you own mind  and thus understand all things?Giving birth and nourishing,  having without possessing,  acting with no expectations,  leading and not trying to control:  this is the supreme virtue. 11    We join spokes together in a wheel,  but it is the center hole  that makes the wagon move.We shape clay into a pot,  but it is the emptiness inside  that holds whatever we want.We hammer wood for a house,  but it is the inner space  that makes it livable.We work with being,  but non-being is what we use. 12    Colors blind the eye.  Sounds deafen the ear.  Flavors numb the taste.  Thoughts weaken the mind.  Desires wither the heart.The Master observes the world  but trusts his inner vision.  He allows things to come and go.  His heart is open as the sky. 13    Success is as dangerous as failure.  Hope is as hollow as fear.What does it mean that success is a dangerous as failure?  Whether you go up the ladder or down it,  you position is shaky.  When you stand with your two feet on the ground,  you will always keep your balance.What does it mean that hope is as hollow as fear?  Hope and fear are both phantoms  that arise from thinking of the self.  When we dont see the self as self,  what do we have to fear?See the world as your self.  Have faith in the way things are.  Love the world as your self;  then you can care for all things. 14    Look, and it cant be seen.  Listen, and it cant be heard.  Reach, and it cant be grasped.Above, it isnt bright.  Below, it isnt dark.  Seamless, unnamable,  it returns to the realm of nothing.  Form that includes all forms,  image without an image,  subtle, beyond all conception.Approach it and there is no beginning;  follow it and there is no end.  You cant know it, but you can be it,  at ease in your own life.  Just realize where you come from:  this is the essence of wisdom. 15    The ancient Masters were profound and subtle.  Their wisdom was unfathomable.  There is no way to describe it;  all we can describe is their appearance.They were careful  as someone crossing an iced-over stream.  Alert as a warrior in enemy territory.  Courteous as a guest.  Fluid as melting ice.  Shapable as a block of wood.  Receptive as a valley.  Clear as a glass of water.Do you have the patience to wait  till your mud settles and the water is clear?  Can you remain unmoving  till the right action arises by itself?The Master doesnt seek fulfillment.  Not seeking, not expecting,  she is present, and can welcome all things. 16    Empty your mind of all thoughts.  Let your heart be at peace.  Watch the turmoil of beings,  but contemplate their return.Each separate being in the universe  returns to the common source.  Returning to the source is serenity.If you dont realize the source,  you stumble in confusion and sorrow.  When you realize where you come from,  you naturally become tolerant,  disinterested, amused,  kindhearted as a grandmother,  dignified as a king.  Immersed in the wonder of the Tao,  you can deal with whatever life brings you,  and when death comes, you are ready. 17    When the Master governs, the people  are hardly aware that he exists.  Next best is a leader who is loved.  Next, one who is feared.  The worst is one who is despised.If you dont trust the people,  you make them untrustworthy.The Master doesnt talk, he acts.  When his work is done,  the people say, "Amazing:  we did it, all by ourselves!" 18    When the great Tao is forgotten,  goodness and piety appear.  When the bodys intelligence declines,  cleverness and knowledge step forth.  When there is no peace in the family,  filial piety begins.  When the country falls into chaos,  patriotism is born. 19    Throw away holiness and wisdom,  and people will be a hundred times happier.  Throw away morality and justice,  and people will do the right thing.  Throw away industry and profit,  and there wont be any thieves.If these three arent enough,  just stay at the center of the circle  and let all things take their course. 20    Stop thinking, and end your problems.  What difference between yes and no?  What difference between success and failure?  Must you value what others value,  avoid what others avoid?  How ridiculous!Other people are excited,  as though they were at a parade.  I alone dont care,  I alone am expressionless,  like an infant before it can smile.Other people have what they need;  I alone possess nothing.  I alone drift about,  like someone without a home.  I am like an idiot, my mind is so empty.Other people are bright;  I alone am dark.  Other people are sharper;  I alone am dull.  Other people have a purpose;  I alone dont know.  I drift like a wave on the ocean,  I blow as aimless as the wind.I am different from ordinary people.  I drink from the Great Mothers breasts. 21    The Master keeps her mind  always at one with the Tao;  that is what gives her her radiance.The Tao is ungraspable.  How can her mind be at one with it?  Because she doesnt cling to ideas.The Tao is dark and unfathomable.  How can it make her radiant?  Because she lets it.Since before time and space were,  the Tao is.  It is beyond is and is not.  How do I know this is true?  I look inside myself and see. 22    If you want to become whole,  let yourself be partial.  If you want to become straight,  let yourself be crooked.  If you want to become full,  let yourself be empty.  If you want to be reborn,  let yourself die.  If you want to be given everything,  give everything up.The Master, by residing in the Tao,  sets an example for all beings.  Because he doesnt display himself,  people can see his light.  Because he has nothing to prove,  people can trust his words.  Because he doesnt know who he is,  people recognize themselves in him.  Because he has no goad in mind,  everything he does succeeds.When the ancient Masters said,  "If you want to be given everything,  give everything up,"  they werent using empty phrases.  Only in being lived by the Tao can you be truly yourself. 23    Express yourself completely,  then keep quiet.  Be like the forces of nature:  when it blows, there is only wind;  when it rains, there is only rain;  when the clouds pass, the sun shines through.If you open yourself to the Tao,  you are at one with the Tao  and you can embody it completely.  If you open yourself to insight,  you are at one with insight  and you can use it completely.  If you open yourself to loss,  you are at one with loss  and you can accept it completely.Open yourself to the Tao,  then trust your natural responses;  and everything will fall into place. 24    He who stands on tiptoe  doesnt stand form.  He who rushes ahead  doesnt go far.  He who tries to shine  dims his own light.  He who defines himself  cant know who he really is.  He who has power over others  cant empower himself.  He who clings to his work  will create nothing that endures.If you want to accord with the Tao,  just do your job, then let go. 25    There was something formless and perfect  before the universe was born.  It is serene. Empty.  Solitary. Unchanging.  Infinite. Eternally present.  It is the mother of the universe.  For lack of a better name,  I call it the Tao.It flows through all things,  inside and outside, and returns  to the origin of all things.The Tao is great.  The universe is great.  Earth is great.  Man is great.  These are the four great powers.Man follows the earth.  Earth follows the universe.  The universe follows the Tao.  The Tao follows only itself. 26    The heavy is the root of the light.  The unmoved is the source of all movement.Thus the Master travels all day  without leaving home.  However splendid the views,  she stays serenely in herself.Why should the lord of the country  flit about like a fool?  If you let yourself be blown to and fro,  you lose touch with your root.  If you let restlessness move you,  you lose touch with who you are. 27    A good traveler has no fixed plans  and is not intent upon arriving.  A good artist lets his intuition  lead him wherever it wants.  A good scientist has freed himself of concepts  and keeps his mind open to what is.Thus the Master is available to all people  and doesnt reject anyone.  He is ready to use all situations  and doesnt waste anything.  This is called embodying the light.What is a good man but a bad mans teacher?  What is a bad man but a good mans job?  If you dont understand this, you will get lost,  however intelligent you are.  It is the great secret. 28    Know the male,  yet keep to the female:  receive the world in your arms.  If you receive the world,  the Tao will never leave you  and you will be like a little child.Know the white,  yet keep to the black:  be a pattern for the world.  If you are a pattern for the world,  the Tao will be strong inside you  and there will be nothing you cant do.Know the personal,  yet keep to the impersonal:  accept the world as it is.  If you accept the world,  the Tao will be luminous inside you  and you will return to your primal self.The world is formed from the void,  like utensils from a block of wood.  The Master knows the utensils,  yet keeps to the the block:  thus she can use all things. 29    Do you want to improve the world?  I dont think it can be done.The world is sacred.  It cant be improved.  If you tamper with it, youll ruin it.  If you treat it like an object, youll lose it.There is a time for being ahead,  a time for being behind;  a time for being in motion,  a time for being at rest;  a time for being vigorous,  a time for being exhausted;  a time for being safe,  a time for being in danger.The Master sees things as they are,  without trying to control them.  She lets them go their own way,  and resides at the center of the circle. 30    Whoever relies on the Tao in governing men  doesnt try to force issues  or defeat enemies by force of arms.  For every force there is a counterforce.  Violence, even well intentioned,  always rebounds upon oneself.The Master does his job  and then stops.  He understands that the universe  is forever out of control,  and that trying to dominate events  goes against the current of the Tao.  Because he believes in himself,  he doesnt try to convince others.  Because he is content with himself,  he doesnt need othersapproval.  Because he accepts himself,  the whole world accepts him. 31    Weapons are the tools of violence;  all decent men detest them.Weapons are the tools of fear;  a decent man will avoid them  except in the direst necessity  and, if compelled, will use them  only with the utmost restraint.  Peace is his highest value.  If the peace has been shattered,  how can he be content?  His enemies are not demons,  but human beings like himself.  He doesnt wish them personal harm.  Nor does he rejoice in victory.  How could he rejoice in victory  and delight in the slaughter of men?He enters a battle gravely,  with sorrow and with great compassion,  as if he were attending a funeral. 32    The Tao cant be perceived.  Smaller than an electron,  it contains uncountable galaxies.If powerful men and women  could remain centered in the Tao,  all things would be in harmony.  The world would become a paradise.  All people would be at peace,  and the law would be written in their hearts.When you have names and forms,  know that they are provisional.  When you have institutions,  know where their functions should end.  Knowing when to stop,  you can avoid any danger.All things end in the Tao  as rivers flow into the sea. 33    Knowing others is intelligence;  knowing yourself is true wisdom.  Mastering others is strength;  mastering yourself is true power.If you realize that you have enough,  you are truly rich.  If you stay in the center  and embrace death with your whole heart,  you will endure forever. 34    The great Tao flows everywhere.  All things are born from it,  yet it doesnt create them.  It pours itself into its work,  yet it makes no claim.  It nourishes infinite worlds,  yet it doesnt hold on to them.  Since it is merged with all things  and hidden in their hearts,  it can be called humble.  Since all things vanish into it  and it alone endures,  it can be called great.  It isnt aware of its greatness;  thus it is truly great. 35    She who is centered in the Tao  can go where she wishes, without danger.  She perceives the universal harmony,  even amid great pain,  because she has found peace in her heart.Music or the smell of good cooking  may make people stop and enjoy.  But words that point to the Tao  seem monotonous and without flavor.  When you look for it, there is nothing to see.  When you listen for it, there is nothing to hear.  When you use it, it is inexhaustible. 36    If you want to shrink something,  you must first allow it to expand.  If you want to get rid of something,  you must first allow it to flourish.  If you want to take something,  you must first allow it to be given.  This is called the subtle perception  of the way things are.The soft overcomes the hard.  The slow overcomes the fast.  Let your workings remain a mystery.  Just show people the results. 37    The Tao never does anything,  yet through it all things are done.If powerful men and women  could venter themselves in it,  the whole world would be transformed  by itself, in its natural rhythms.  People would be content  with their simple, everyday lives,  in harmony, and free of desire.When there is no desire,  all things are at peace. 38    The Master doesnt try to be powerful;  thus he is truly powerful.  The ordinary man keeps reaching for power;  thus he never has enough.The Master does nothing,  yet he leaves nothing undone.  The ordinary man is always doing things,  yet many more are left to be done.The kind man does something,  yet something remains undone.  The just man does something,  and leaves many things to be done.  The moral man does something,  and when no one responds  he rolls up his sleeves and uses force.When the Tao is lost, there is goodness.  When goodness is lost, there is morality.  When morality is lost, there is ritual.  Ritual is the husk of true faith,  the beginning of chaos.Therefore the Master concerns himself  with the depths and not the surface,  with the fruit and not the flower.  He has no will of his own.  He dwells in reality,  and lets all illusions go. 39    In harmony with the Tao,  the sky is clear and spacious,  the earth is solid and full,  all creature flourish together,  content with the way they are,  endlessly repeating themselves,  endlessly renewed.When man interferes with the Tao,  the sky becomes filthy,  the earth becomes depleted,  the equilibrium crumbles,  creatures become extinct.The Master views the parts with compassion,  because he understands the whole.  His constant practice is humility.  He doesnt glitter like a jewel  but lets himself be shaped by the Tao,  as rugged and common as stone. 40    Return is the movement of the Tao.  Yielding is the way of the Tao.All things are born of being.  Being is born of non-being. 41    When a superior man hears of the Tao,  he immediately begins to embody it.  When an average man hears of the Tao,  he half believes it, half doubts it.  When a foolish man hears of the Tao,  he laughs out loud.  If he didnt laugh,  it wouldnt be the Tao.Thus it is said:  The path into the light seems dark,  the path forward seems to go back,  the direct path seems long,  true power seems weak,  true purity seems tarnished,  true steadfastness seems changeable,  true clarity seems obscure,  the greatest are seems unsophisticated,  the greatest love seems indifferent,  the greatest wisdom seems childish.The Tao is nowhere to be found.  Yet it nourishes and completes all things. 42    The Tao gives birth to One.  One gives birth to Two.  Two gives birth to Three.  Three gives birth to all things.All things have their backs to the female  and stand facing the male.  When male and female combine,  all things achieve harmony.Ordinary men hate solitude.  But the Master makes use of it,  embracing his aloneness, realizing  he is one with the whole universe. 43    The gentlest thing in the world  overcomes the hardest thing in the world.  That which has no substance  enters where there is no space.  This shows the value of non-action.Teaching without words,  performing without actions:  that is the Masters way. 44    Fame or integrity: which is more important?  Money or happiness: which is more valuable?  Success of failure: which is more destructive?If you look to others for fulfillment,  you will never truly be fulfilled.  If your happiness depends on money,  you will never be happy with yourself.Be content with what you have;  rejoice in the way things are.  When you realize there is nothing lacking,  the whole world belongs to you. 45    True perfection seems imperfect,  yet it is perfectly itself.  True fullness seems empty,  yet it is fully present.True straightness seems crooked.  True wisdom seems foolish.  True art seems artless.The Master allows things to happen.  She shapes events as they come.  She steps out of the way  and lets the Tao speak for itself. 46    When a country is in harmony with the Tao,  the factories make trucks and tractors.  When a country goes counter to the Tao,  warheads are stockpiled outside the cities.There is no greater illusion than fear,  no greater wrong than preparing to defend yourself,  no greater misfortune than having an enemy.Whoever can see through all fear  will always be safe. 47    Without opening your door,  you can open your heart to the world.  Without looking out your window,  you can see the essence of the Tao.The more you know,  the less you understand.The Master arrives without leaving,  sees the light without looking,  achieves without doing a thing. 48    In pursuit of knowledge,  every day something is added.  In the practice of the Tao,  every day something is dropped.  Less and less do you need to force things,  until finally you arrive at non-action.  When nothing is done,  nothing is left undone.True mastery can be gained  by letting things go their own way.  It cant be gained by interfering. 49    The Master has no mind of her own.  She works with the mind of the people.She is good to people who are good.  She is also good to people who arent good.  This is true goodness.She trusts people who are trustworthy.  She also trusts people who arent trustworthy.  This is true trust.The Masters mind is like space.  People dont understand her.  They look to her and wait.  She treats them like her own children. 50    The Master gives himself up  to whatever the moment brings.  He knows that he is going to die,  and her has nothing left to hold on to:  no illusions in his mind,  no resistances in his body.  He doesnt think about his actions;  they flow from the core of his being.  He holds nothing back from life;  therefore he is ready for death,  as a man is ready for sleep  after a good days work. 51    Every being in the universe  is an expression of the Tao.  It springs into existence,  unconscious, perfect, free,  takes on a physical body,  lets circumstances complete it.  That is why every being  spontaneously honors the Tao.The Tao gives birth to all beings,  nourishes them, maintains them,  cares for them, comforts them, protects them,  takes them back to itself,  creating without possessing,  acting without expecting,  guiding without interfering.  That is why love of the Tao  is in the very nature of things. 52    In the beginning was the Tao.  All things issue from it;  all things return to it.To find the origin,  trace back the manifestations.  When you recognize the children  and find the mother,  you will be free of sorrow.If you close your mind in judgements  and traffic with desires,  your heart will be troubled.  If you keep your mind from judging  and arent led by the senses,  your heart will find peace.Seeing into darkness is clarity.  Knowing how to yield is strength.  Use your own light  and return to the source of light.  This is called practicing eternity. 53    The great Way is easy,  yet people prefer the side paths.  Be aware when things are out of balance.  Stay centered within the Tao.When rich speculators prosper  While farmers lose their land;  when government officials spend money  on weapons instead of cures;  when the upper class is extravagant and irresponsible  while the poor have nowhere to turn-  all this is robbery and chaos.  It is not in keeping with the Tao. 54    Whoever is planted in the Tao  will not be rooted up.  Whoever embraces the Tao  will not slip away.  Her name will be held in honor  from generation to generation.Let the Tao be present in your life  and you will become genuine.  Let it be present in your family  and your family will flourish.  Let it be present in your country  and your country will be an example  to all countries in the world.  Let it be present in the universe  and the universe will sing.How do I know this is true?  By looking inside myself. 55    He who is in harmony with the Tao  is like a newborn child.  Its bones are soft, its muscles are weak,  but its grip is powerful.  It doesnt know about the union  of male and female,  yet its penis can stand erect,  so intense is its vital power.  It can scream its head off all day,  yet it never becomes hoarse,  so complete is its harmony.The Masters power is like this.  He lets all things come and go  effortlessly, without desire.  He never expects results;  thus he is never disappointed.  He is never disappointed;  thus his spirit never grows old. 56   Those who know dont talk.  Those who talk dont know.Close your mouth,  block off your senses,  blunt your sharpness,  untie your knots,  soften your glare,  settle your dust.  This is the primal identity.Be like the Tao.  It cant be approached or withdrawn from,  benefited or harmed,  honored or brought into disgrace.  It gives itself up continually.  That is why it endures. 57    If you want to be a great leader,  you must learn to follow the Tao.  Stop trying to control.  Let go of fixed plans and concepts,  and the world will govern itself.The more prohibitions you have,  the less virtuous people will be.  The more weapons you have,  the less secure people will be.  The more subsidies you have,  the less self-reliant people will be.Therefore the Master says:  I let go of the law,  and people become honest.  I let go of economics,  and people become prosperous.  I let go of religion,  and people become serene.  I let go of all desire for the common good,  and the good becomes common as grass. 58    If a country is governed with tolerance,  the people are comfortable and honest.  If a country is governed with repression,  the people are depressed and crafty.When the will to power is in charge,  the higher the ideals, the lower the results.  Try to make people happy,  and you lay the groundwork for misery.  Try to make people moral,  and you lay the groundwork for vice.Thus the Master is content  to serve as an example  and not to impose her will.  She is pointed, but doesnt pierce.  Straightforward, but supple.  Radiant, but easy on the eyes. 59    For governing a country well  there is nothing better than moderation.The mark of a moderate man  is freedom from his own ideas.  Tolerant like the sky,  all-pervading like sunlight,  firm like a mountain,  supple like a tree in the wind,  he has no destination in view  and makes use of anything  life happens to bring his way.Nothing is impossible for him.  Because he has let go,  he can care for the peoples welfare  as a mother cares for her child. 60    Governing a large country  is like frying a small fish.  You spoil it with too much poking.Center your country in the Tao  and evil will have no power.  Not that it isnt there,  but youll be able to step out of its way.Give evil nothing to oppose  and it will disappear by itself. 61    When a country obtains great power,  it becomes like the sea:  all streams run downward into it.  The more powerful it grows,  the greater the need for humility.  Humility means trusting the Tao,  thus never needing to be defensive.A great nation is like a great man:  When he makes a mistake, he realizes it.  Having realized it, he admits it.  Having admitted it, he corrects it.  He considers those who point out his faults  as his most benevolent teachers.  He thinks of his enemy  as the shadow that he himself casts.If a nation is centered in the Tao,  if it nourishes its own people  and doesnt meddle in the affairs of others,  it will be a light to all nations in the world. 62    The Tao is the center of the universe,  the good mans treasure,  the bad mans refuge.Honors can be bought with fine words,  respect can be won with good deeds;  but the Tao is beyond all value,  and no one can achieve it.Thus, when a new leader is chosen,  dont offer to help him  with your wealth or your expertise.  Offer instead  to teach him about the Tao.Why did the ancient Masters esteem the Tao?  Because, being one with the Tao,  when you seek, you find;  and when you make a mistake, you are forgiven.  That is why everybody loves it. 63    Act without doing;  work without effort.  Think of the small as large  and the few as many.  Confront the difficult  while it is still easy;  accomplish the great task  by a series of small acts.The Master never reaches for the great;  thus she achieves greatness.  When she runs into a difficulty,  she stops and gives herself to it.  She doesnt cling to her own comfort;  thus problems are no problem for her. 64    What is rooted is easy to nourish.  What is recent is easy to correct.  What is brittle is easy to break.  What is small is easy to scatter.Prevent trouble before it arises.  Put things in order before they exist.  The giant pine tree  grows from a tiny sprout.  The journey of a thousand miles  starts from beneath your feet.Rushing into action, you fail.  Trying to grasp things, you lose them.  Forcing a project to completion,  you ruin what was almost ripe.Therefore the Master takes action  by letting things take their course.  He remains as calm  at the end as at the beginning.  He has nothing,  thus has nothing to lose.  What he desires is non-desire;  what he learns is to unlearn.  He simply reminds people  of who they have always been.  He cares about nothing but the Tao.  Thus he can care for all things. 65    The ancient Masters  didnt try to educate the people,  but kindly taught them to not-know.When they think that they know the answers,  people are difficult to guide.  When they know that they dont know,  people can find their own way.If you want to learn how to govern,  avoid being clever or rich.  The simplest pattern is the clearest.  Content with an ordinary life,  you can show all people the way  back to their own true nature. 66    All streams flow to the sea  because it is lower than they are.  Humility gives it its power.If you want to govern the people,  you must place yourself below them.  If you want to lead the people,  you must learn how to follow them.The Master is above the people,  and no one feels oppressed.  She goes ahead of the people,  and no one feels manipulated.  The whole world is grateful to her.  Because she competes with no one,  no one can compete with her. 67    Some say that my teaching is nonsense.  Others call it lofty but impractical.  But to those who have looked inside themselves,  this nonsense makes perfect sense.  And to those who put it into practice,  this loftiness has roots that go deep.I have just three things to teach:  simplicity, patience, compassion.  These three are your greatest treasures.  Simple in actions and in thoughts,  you return to the source of being.  Patient with both friends and enemies,  you accord with the way things are.  Compassionate toward yourself,  you reconcile all beings in the world. 68    The best athlete  wants his opponent at his best.  The best general  enters the mind of his enemy.  The best businessman  serves the communal good.  The best leader  follows the will of the people.All of the embody  the virtue of non-competition.  Not that they dont love to compete,  but they do it in the spirit of play.  In this they are like children  and in harmony with the Tao. 69    The generals have a saying:  "Rather than make the first move  it is better to wait and see.  Rather than advance an inch  it is better to retreat a yard."This is called  going forward without advancing,  pushing back without using weapons.There is no greater misfortune  than underestimating your enemy.  Underestimating your enemy  means thinking that he is evil.  Thus you destroy your three treasures  and become an enemy yourself.When two great forces oppose each other,  the victory will go  to the one that knows how to yield. 70    My teachings are easy to understand  and easy to put into practice.  Yet your intellect will never grasp them,  and if you try to practice them, youll fail.My teachings are older than the world.  How can you grasp their meaning?If you want to know me,  look inside your heart. 71    Not-knowing is true knowledge.  Presuming to know is a disease.  First realize that you are sick;  then you can move toward health.The Master is her own physician.  She has healed herself of all knowing.  Thus she is truly whole. 72    When they lose their sense of awe,  people turn to religion.  When they no longer trust themselves,  they begin to depend upon authority.Therefore the Master steps back  so that people wont be confused.  He teaches without a teaching,  so that people will have nothing to learn. 73    The Tao is always at ease.  It overcomes without competing,  answers without speaking a word,  arrives without being summoned,  accomplishes without a plan.Its net covers the whole universe.  And though its meshes are wide,  it doesnt let a thing slip through. 74    If you realize that all things change,  there is nothing you will try to hold on to.  If you arent afraid of dying,  there is nothing you cant achieve.Trying to control the future  is like trying to take the master carpenters place.  When you handle the master carpenters tools,  chances are that youll cut your hand. 75    When taxes are too high,  people go hungry.  When the government is too intrusive,  people lose their spirit.Act for the peoples benefit.  Trust them; leave them alone. 76    Men are born soft and supple;  dead, they are stiff and hard.  Plats are born tender and pliant;  dead, they are brittle and dry.Thus whoever is stiff and inflexible  is a disciple of death.  Whoever is soft and yielding  is a disciple of life.The hard and stiff will be broken.  The soft and supple will prevail. 77    As it acts in the world, the Tao  is like the bending of a bow.  The top is bent downward;  the bottom is bent up.  It adjusts excess and deficiency  so that there is perfect balance.  It takes from what is too much  and give to what isnt enough.Those who try to control,  who use force to protect their power,  go against the direction of the Tao.  They take from those who dont have enough  and give to those who have far too much.The Master can keep giving  because there is no end to her wealth.  She acts without expectation,  succeeds without taking credit,  and doesnt think that she is better  than anyone else. 78    Nothing in the world  is as soft and yielding as water.  Yet for dissolving the hard and inflexible,  nothing can surpass it.The soft overcomes the hard;  the gentle overcomes the rigid.  Everyone knows this is true,  but few can put it into practice.Therefore the Master remains  serene in the midst of sorrow.  Evil cannot enter his heart.  Because he has given up helping,  he is peoples greatest help.True words seem paradoxical. 79    Failure is an opportunity.  If you blame someone else,  there is no end to the blame.Therefore the Master  fulfills her own obligations  and corrects her own mistakes.  She does what she needs to do  and demands nothing of others. 80    If a country is governed wisely,  its inhabitants will be content.  They enjoy the labor of their hands  and dont waste time inventing  labor-saving machines.  Since they dearly love their homes,  they arent interested in travel.  There may be a few wagons and boats,  but these dont go anywhere.  There may be an arsenal of weapons,  but nobody ever uses them.  People enjoy their food,  take pleasure in being with their families,  spend weekends working in their gardens,  delight in the doings of the neighborhood.  And even though the next country is so close  that people can hear its roosters crowing and its dogs barking,  they are content to die of old age  without ever having gone to see it. 81    True words arent eloquent;  eloquent words arent true.  Wise men dont need to prove their point;  men who need to prove their point arent wise.The Master has no possessions.  The more he does for others,  the happier he is.  The more he gives to others,  the wealthier he is.The Tao nourishes by not forcing.  By not dominating, the Master leads.  Who is it that knows there is no ego? And you must realize, you see, that this is a problem created linguistically. I explained that language based on the sentence composed of subject, verb and predicate, contains the hidden belief system that events are started by nouns, by things. And so its very important to understand that, in the real universe, there are no things at all. And this startles people, because we think of the universe as the sum-total of things. But when you go into the question what do you mean by a thing?you ask children this question, What do you mean by a thing? And theyll say, well, an object. Well, Ill say, youve just substituted another word. That doesnt tell me anything. Or they could come back, if theyre very smart, and say What do you mean by anything? [laughs] I got once, in a class of high school kids, an Italian girl who said a thing is a noun. Well, she was getting warm. A thing is a think. Its almost the same word. Its a unit of thought in the same way that an inch is a unit of linear measure. Or a pound a unit of weight. And so in various languages this comes out. In German youve got Ding: thing, denken: to think. In Latin, res: thing, reor: to think. So when we reify, that means to thing-ify. And A. N. Whitehead used to talk about the fallacy of misplaced concretion. Thing-ifying what isnt there. But its easy to understand this; although its a little bit of a shock to our common sense. For purposes of description, we must break the world down into some sort of units. This is the basis of calculus. How do you measure a curve? Well, you treat it as a set of points, and in this way, measure it. Although it isnt a set of points. There is no such thing as a point. Euclid defined a point as that which has position but no magnitude. I think its right, isnt it, that in modern mathematics one doesnt define a point at all. You just assume. Its an axiom. So when you ask, How many things is a person; an individual organism? Well, it depends on what point of view youre going to take in describing it. In the normal way, we describe one body as a body. And that is a thing. Physiology describes it as many organs. Physics describes it as many molecules, or atoms, or electrons, mesons, protons, what have you. And sociology will look upon you as only a part-thing, because the sociologist likes to have his unit [be] a group, a society. And so it goes. It dependslets take rabbits. The way you describe a rabbit will depend on whether you are a hunter or a furrier. Its the way you look at it, and the way you describe it, so that the way of describing always varies according to the use you want to make; so that the world is not unlike a Rorschach blot. And in psychological testing we get people to describe Rorschach blots and say what they see in them. Now you can perfectly well imagine that we, in this room, could have an enormous Rorschach blot on the wall. And we would all discuss it and arrive at a consensus about what it was. And we would manage, in other words, to coagulate our different points of view. And if there were a very dominant person present, he or she would tend to force their particular view upon everybody else and say, No, obviously, it isnt what you say it is; look! Its perfectly clear that its that! So we are living in a Rorschach blot. Only, urban people have difficulty in realizing this. Because urban people live in a straightened out world. And we call them straights, or squares, because they think in very simplistic terms. See, Euclid had a very simple mind, and, therefore, he discussed geometry, which wasnt a measure of the Earth at all. The word geometry, phrased from the Greek gios (): the world, the Earth, and metro (), which means to measure. Now, the Greek word for measure, from which we get metric, meter, comes from the Sanskrit root mtr (), which also means to measure. And derived from that is the Sanskrit word my (), which means illusion as well as imagination. So figuring it out is the measuring of the world; the metering. And meter is also the Greek word for mother, and is, of course, the root of the word matter, material. And so, when we ask, Does it matter? we are asking, does it measure up to anything? Well, we come to the conclusion that there is no matter. Theres form. Its the form that matters, or you could say the universe is a matter of form. And in Sanskrit there is no word for matter. The word rpa (), which is used for the material or physical world, means form. And so you get nmarpa () as the full name for what we call physical reality. Nma means name, rpa form, so: it is named form. And so Lao-Tzu (), in writing the Tao Te Ching (), says, The nameless [or the no-name] is the basis of heaven and Earth. But the named is the mother of ten thousand things. So in the sense, then, of this, you can understand the saying, In the beginning was the Word. All things were made by Him, and without Him theres not anything made that was made. Because you dont get things until you start naming. Because then you point out, on the universal Rorschach blot, this wiggle. What do you mean, this wiggle? Where does one wiggle begin and the other end? This is a matter of arbitrary definition. Where does your head end and your neck begin? Here? Here? Here? Here? Here? Where is it? We know vaguely. But you cant be precise about it. Because you can look at the head and the neck as continuous. You can start here and say, well, its all one thing up from here to here, see? Or you can start here and say, no, its all one thing from here to here. Et cetera. Because its all arbitrary. And the value of it is that, by description, and by conventional decisions as to where to draw the line, we can communicate in language. And this is socially valuable. But we must not be deluded by what we are doing. Because if we do truly believe that the world is a lot of separate things, we believe that we can take them apart and have this without that. And so, when you apply this, say, to medicine, and you get a medical specialist who knows all about the heart and nothing about the lungs, he starts interfering with the human body as if it were an automobile with replaceable parts. He says, Well take this out. Just a little mechanical work; get a wrench, and a screwdriver, and so ononly, the surgical equivalentsand he would take this out. So theres a tumor, and we take it out. Alright, if hes not terribly careful, a metastatic consequence follows that some of the cancerous cells will go into the bloodstream through the cutting, and the cancer will spread all over the body. Or if you start fiddling around with peoples glands and give them certain medicines to stimulate this gland, or to cool its operation in some way, you upset a balance which runs through the whole physical system. Exactly the same thing happens when you use DDT on mosquitoes. Well, it kills the birds. And the birds were eating the mosquitoes anyway, and so were the spiders. And you killed the spiders along with the mosquitoes. Or the fleas. And we find, in other words, that the natural universe is a very intricate system of balances which cannot really be split. Now, lets take the bees and the flowers. In a world of no bees theres no flowers; in a world of no flowersno bees. Because bees and flowers are aspects of the same organism, or organization. They go together, so I invent the word goeswith to indicate organic relationships. And we as human beings, obviously, we gowith an enormous cosmos of geological, botanical, and zoological events. And we are entirely dependent on them, and we cannot treat them as really and truly separate species. The bees are as much a part of us as they are a part of the flowers, because we need vegetablesand we cant have those without bees or other insects. So what weve got is a universe that all hangs together, and where each so-called part of it implies all the other parts. Lets take what we call holography. This is a method of visual reproduction that employs laser beams. Now, you can cut a small piece out of the photographic negativejust a tiny little squareand by holographic method you can reconstruct, from that little piece, the rest of the negative. It will be pretty clear in the middle place, where youve taken out the tiny square, and then vaguer towards the edges. But its all implied in that little square. Now, of course, a photographic negative is a crystal. Its a structure of crystals. And the way the crystals are formed in that tiny piece depends on its original environment on the whole negative. See that? You, the way you are, depends on, or goeswith your cultural, social, and biophysical environment. So there is really and truly no way of separating out independent things. And this is difficult for people to understand because of our method of motion. A plant is understandable as something growing out of the earth because its rooted. But human beings wander about on legs. And we dont seem so stuck to things as plants do. And therefore we have delusions of separation. But what about the seed that comes from the plant? Its fascinating how plants have different methods of seeding themselves. They have little helicopters. They have burs that stick in the fur of animals. They have fruit, which is tempting to birds and other creatures to eat. And they swallow the seeds, and take them somewhere else and excrete them, in manure, all ready to go. They have wonderful little fuzzy things of cotton fibers, where theres a seed in the middle, which float through the air for miles and miles. Theres also an extremely ingenious plant that has pods. And when the pods are ripe, they suddenly break. The pod twists itself, each side of it, into a spiral, and the seeds are thrown way out. We used to have one in our garden in England next to a wooden fence. And every time it went crack, all these seeds would rattle on the fence. Tremendous energy they were sent out with. And look at the whole process of pollination and how extraordinary that is. Showing and arguing a very high order of intelligencein vegetables.  So when we say of somebody, Shes a vegetableterminal canceralas, only become a vegetable. This is a misuse of the word vegetable. Vegetables must be respected. And people who do respect vegetables, and who talk to them, and love themsomehow, those vegetables respond. And they becomewe say they have a green thumb. So I think that we are living in an intensely interconnected universe. Only, our language system has broken it up for purposes of discussion. And we spend so much time in discussion that we form the false impression that the world is broken up in the way language breaks it up, and it isnt! Now I may know that theoretically as a scientist, as a biologist, or whatever be my approach, but I dont necessarily feel it. An ecologist, a person who devotes a whole life study to realizing the interdependence of everything in the world, is in private life still a Christian egothat is to say, a separate soul inside his bag of body. Thats the way he feels. And we have enormous difficulty in avoiding that feeling because of our social influence on each other. Now, if you befriend, say, a group of Christiansand they may be Baptistsand for various reasons its important for you to be a member of this group, you will eventually think their way. The most startling example of this was an experiment devised by B. F. Skinner. He would be giving a class in psychology, and he would suddenly send two students out of the room, and say come back when we call you. Then he would explain to the class the game rule: Were going to put two chairs here, up beside me. Chair A. Chair B. Were going to have a discussion, and these two students are going to come back. We will agree with everything that is said by the student who sits in chair A; we will disagree with everything said by the student in chair B. The effect of this was astounding. Because, even if the student sitting in chair A was rather inarticulate, the fact that the group agreed with everything he said made him extremely expressive and very happy. However articulate the student in chair B, where everything was wrong with himhe got completely confused. And the only way out was for the studenteither studentto explain to the class the game rules that they were playing. But, you see, they didnt know these rules, and they had to be very clever indeed to deduce what was the pattern. I once got into this situation. I had a group of students come and visit me with their faculty member in charge of them. And he was very obstreperous. He argued; he really wanted to argue. So I got the general drift of his argument, see? What sort of opinions were likeable to him. And then said something that would entirely accord with that sort of opinion system. And he denied it. So I said, Sir, you are playing a game. You are bound and determined to disagree with anything I say. And he was nonplussed. So, you see, we are under this tremendous social pressure, because talking with each other is our principal means of communication, and so, more and more, it hypnotizes us. When you hypnotize a person, you do it chiefly by talking. Relax while I count up to five, you know? Be very relaxed, et cetera, all that jazz. And so it is the word which spellbinds us. Look at that word: the spellbind, a victim of spelling. And so all these conventions of language in which we think, even if were quite illiterateilliterate people think in words just as much as literate people. In other words, an ordinary ignoramus is just as much, if not more, under the spell of words than an intellectual. Children, as soon as they are taught language, become absolutely clobbered by it, and resent, tremendously, being called something. See, if I say Johnny is a sissyHe called me a sissy! And children are absolute victims of the calendar. They want to know when its going to happen. How soon is Christmas? How soon is my birthday? They want time to go in jerks from one festival to another, because they are so poisoned by adult conceptions. They have no antibodies against them. So, likewise, the Japanese have no antibodies against Western culture. They are complete victims of it. They succumb to smog, and even think its a good thing to have smog. They have songs about it: how the beautiful fog over the furnace buildings of the factories... you know? Haikuthis is true; Im not kidding. In a nation of people thats supposed to be great lovers of nature! Japan is unbelievable! Go to a beach in Japan. Youd think they would appreciate wonderful stretches of sand, and rocks, and the sound of the waves. The tideline of a Japanese beach almost anywhere around the island is a complete mess of plastic cast-offs. Sun-lotion bottles, condoms, discarded sandals, anything you could imaginejust masses of it. Go to a natural beauty place, where all the tourists go to look a the famous view, and the whole place is scattered with rubbish. Napkins, kleenex, sandwich bags, cigarette packages, what have you. When you travel, in Japan, on the underground, in Tokyo, one imagines the Japanese are always very polite. And in their own setting, and in their own cultural context they indeed are. But on a subway everything goes amok, and people are crammed in like sardines. They even have special officials to shove the crowd intointo the train! They cannot cope with this situation that is foreign to their cultural context. So this iswhat Im saying is, watch outfor your social conditioning, and how your constant commerce in language with other people shapes the way in which you actually sense the world. Now, we say seeing is believing. But it is truer to say that believing is seeing. There was a very marvelous scientist of optics by the name of Adelbert Ames, who devised a whole series of experiments where you could go into a big room, say with booths all around, and in these booths there were exhibits that defied the laws of logicor seemed to. There was, for example, the marvelous experiment of the trapezoidal window. You make a window frame, one side of which is much longer than the other, see? Then you suspend this on wires in such a way that an axis is formed through the perpendicular center of the frame. And on this, the frame revolves. What you see is a window frame twitching, like this. Its actually going round, but it seems to be twitching. Then you put a little cube on one upper corner, and color it red, see? So it will stand out. And you see this thing twitching, but the cube, unaccountably, going round. Then, another experiment, where youre in a dark room; theres a group of people. And a little bright light suddenly appears in front of them; very small. And the operator says, Will those who observe any movement of this light please account for it and describe it? So somebody says, Its floating upwards. Somebody says, Its not drifting off to the left. And all this conversation goes on. Then the lights are turned up, and its shown that this point had never moved at all. It was a fixed light. So there are all kinds of things. I mean, Ames only scratched the surface of what we see because we believe in it. We see what we want to see, or what we are supposed to see, and are not really aware of whats going on. Now, all stage magic is based on this. And this is why one can learn a great deal about mysticism from stage magic. What the magician does is, he persuades you to see what you expect to see, but in the meantime does something completely unexpected. Your attention has been misdirected. He says, Look at this. I want you to look at it very carefully because we dont want any hocus pocus around here. See? I want you to examine this thing Im showing you and be sure there is no hocus pocus. Meanwhile, hes doing something that you dont notice at all, and laying a trap. So that when you understand the nature of stage magic, you think goddamnit, how simple that was. Why didnt I see? Why was I such a fool as I overlooked this idiotically simple trick? And the best tricks are the simplest, and dont involve complicated apparatus at all. The best stage magicians are the ones who will stand in the middle of a crowd of people, you knowwith no stage hocus pocus, all wires, or trapdoors; anything like thatand right under your nose will use a deck of cards or a few coins to do things that flabbergast people totally. And all those things are extremely simpleonce you know. And so thats very much like being enlightened. Having satori (). When you get it, you think oh, for heavens sakes, why didnt I see that? I mean, how obvious? But the difficulty in communication here is that satori, or enlightenment, is very much like seeing a joke. And then you laugh. You laugh genuinely, from here. But if somebody explains it to you, you dont get the same laugh as if you saw it right off. You get a throat-laugh instead of a belly-laugh. So thats why people are reluctant to explain too much about it, and rather use the method whereby you will see it for yourself, and then laughor what is the cosmic equivalent. So therefore, we are, most of us, in a state of hypnosis induced by the incantation of language. The enchantment, the spellbinding. And when one speaks of awakeningas, say, in Buddhism one speaks of the Buddha as the enlightened oneit means, therefore, dehypnotization. Coming to your senses. But of course, to do that, you have to go out of your mind. Well, then, what that involvesamong other thingsis an awakening to the true structure of your common sense. I once was invited to give an address before the American Psychiatric Association. It was a very funny situation because Aldous Huxley had been supposed to give the talk, and he was sick. And so they invited me to come give it instead. And it was on a very dangerous subject: on the use of LSD. This was many years ago; this was in 1958, when LSD was just discovered. And what was I going to say? Oh, they were horrified. Would I please meet with the committee, because they didnt want anything to be said that would somehow damage their scientific integrity. So here they were, anxious as all get-out. Well, I said, You invited me here to talk, and to tell you the truth, I dont know what Im going to say, because I never prepare anything in advance. Im going to listen to what you have to say first, and then Ill make up my mind. So I attended the morning conference. And one interminably dull paper after another was read, you know? And most of them by psychoanalytically oriented people who were discussing mysticism in terms of regression. Regression to the womb. Regression to the oceanic feeling of theas yetundifferentiated infant. So the papers went on and on, and it was time for lunch. And everybody was hungry and bored. So I said to the chairmanhe called me to the platformI said, How much time? Oh, he said, I dont know; make it fifteen minutes. Okay. So I said to the group, Now, look. I know youre waiting for lunch, and this is not going to be another learned paper. It is going to be a few remarks off the cuff. We philosophers are very grateful to you psychiatrists for all your explorations into the emotional and unconscious bases of our opinions, and our views of the world. And this has been extremely informative and interesting. Now, however, the shoe is on the other foot, and wed like to inform you of the unconscious intellectual assumptions underlying your psychiatric methods. You are allwhether you know it or notproducts of the world view of the 19th century. And your ideas of the functioning of the nervous system and of psychoanalytic process are based on Newtonian mechanics. Psychoanalysis is, in effect, psycho-hydraulics, because you talk about damming up things, you talk about repression, you talk about the flow ofwhat do you call it?free association, and you talk about unconscious mental mechanisms. So it is clear that you are still in a Newtonian psyche, and you havent yet graduated to a quantum psyche. And so, because of this, you have a theorywhich amounts to high dogmathat the unconscious is stupid. And you call it libido, which is a cussword. Libidinous. It means blind lust. And Freud used that word in parallel with Ernst Haeckel, who was a contemporary biologist who thought that the energy of the universe was blind energy. Despite the fact we have eyes. So they all had their reductionist view that human life was a complication of a force that was basically stupid, ignorant, unconscious, and immoral. Well, they said, we cant be like the Christians and attempt to beat this force into submission because its too powerful for us. But weve got a new wrinkle. What we are going to do is, were going to do it like we train a horse. Instead of whipping it, you give it lumps of sugar. And youwatch out though! You see, Freud was scared stiff of the unconscious. He was a good, bourgeois, Jewish-Viennese, well-behaved person. Once upon a time, Freud and Jung went together to New York. And Jung was delighted to walk down Fifth Avenue and see so many beautiful women. And he turned to Freud and said, My goodness, how many beautiful women there are here. Why dont we somehow arrange and make a date for the night? And Freud drew himself up and said, You forget, Herr Doktor, Im a married man. So Freud always thought that the unconscious was not really very nice. Now, he had a contemporary by the name of Georg Groddeck. And Georg Groddeck is very little known in this country. And Groddeck gave Freud many of his basic ideas. Thehe used slightly differently. Where Freud called it the id, Groddeck called it the it. But Groddeck had tremendous faith in the unconscious. He trusted it completely. And he wrote a book called The Book of the It, which is a series of letters to his niece which he signs Patrick Troll. And you know, a troll is a goblin. And Groddeck looked like a goblin. He had very big, pointed ears that stuck out. And the kind of strangely weird but benign expression. And he had a sanitarium in Baden-Baden, and there he practiced massage for people who came to him for analysis, and analysis for people who came to him for massage. He was a completely wonderful man because everybody felt calmed by him. They felt an atmosphere of implicit faith in nature, and especially in your own inner nature. No matter what, there is a wisdom inside you which may seem absurd, but you have to trust it. And so Keyserling, Hermann Keyserling, you know, who was a great Lithuanian philosopher, said nobody could possibly remind him more of Lao-Tzu than Groddeck. Now, if Groddeck had got into Freud, it wouldve been a much better scene. But there was in all this, you see, in Freud, the basic mistrust of the unconscious. And this led to a quarrel with Jung, because Jung went down to a lower level of the unconscious, which he called collective, and found out that there was a patterning process hereformative patterning process, which contained all the wisdom of mankind. So for example, if you say, Well, its a great pity that the American Indian culture is wiped out, a Jungian would say, I know it is a pity but, its all still therein the depths of the psycheand sooner or later it will all emerge again. Because this patterning is eternal. And we, in our modern life, we reproduce patterns, we reproduce rituals, we reproduce fantasies and myths which can be discovered as having existed 25,000 years ago. Because your unconscious is timeless. And everything is there if you go hunting for it. But they were still a bit scared. I know some of the old Jungian analysts I used to know in New York were very uptight about fishing in the unconscious and said, Yeah... true, but there is also in the unconscious the primordial slime, which is full of serpents and crocodiles and most things that would give us the heebie-jeebies. And if youre not very careful those things will come up and invade your consciousness. Also, there are not only serpents and crocodiles, and all those creepy-crawlies, ghoulies and ghosties, and long-legged beasties, and things that go bump in the nighttheres also the divine. And if youre not very careful you can be inflated by the divine. You can suddenly have a mystical experience. Supposing youre kind of a half-miseducated person, like most of us are, who takes LSD. And suddenly, these unconscious contents come up and you discover youre divine, and you think youre God. And you take on all these airs and graces. I mean, the people like Meher Baba, who ran around announcing that he was personally in charge of the universe, and expected to be treated as such. Well, we put such people in the nuthouse; thats what they did to Jesus. Thats intolerable. And Jung was right, in a way, when he said, That is inflation. It is turning your ego into God instead of having God as your ego. Because you didnt understand. You have to, in other words. Obviously, if youre going to let up all these great energies in the unconscious, you must be wise. You must know something about it and not jump to silly conclusions and delusions. But you see, there was in Jung a basic trust. More than the creepy-crawlies and the ghoulies and ghosties, the collective unconscious was a source of wisdom. A formative pattern, whichif allowed to develop in the right waywould integrate the individual so that all his conscious functioning would become like a flower. And you know how a flower is balanced. It comes out as a beautiful circle, with a middle. And for some reason as yet unexplained, when anybody wants to create a symbol of the divine they dont use a human facethey use a flower or a star. The rose window, the lotus. When I think what I want, you know, I try sometimes to figure out what I would really like to have. What do I like to look at? I eventually settle for a flower. Thats why they bring flowers to sick people in hospitals. Take a morning glory and look at it. Did you ever see such a thing? Well, they say in the Freudian explanation you use that as a substitute for a vagina. I say thats not an answer to a question; it raises a new one. Whats so interesting about a vagina? See, the only thing my father and I dont agree about is sex. We agree about everything else; religion and so on. But sexhes old-fashioned. And he said, Nature makes this activity extremely pleasant in order that the species will continue. So that we will be sure to go on. But you must be very careful not to do it just for the pleasure of it, but remembering the responsibility of continuing the species. Well, then we got the population boom. And is that going to be solved by chastity? I doubt it. You know, taking a rather realistic view of things. No, I dont think that thewhen I ask myself, What is the point of continuing the species?we get back to the thing I was raising this morning about survival: why go on? Whats it about? Do you live to eat or do you eat to live? Personally, I live to eat. And I dont reproduce childrenalthough, Ive done my bit on that... rather, a little too muchbut I think the point of having life going on is so that we can have sex. Its a good thing in itself. Its like dancing and really communicating. Loving somebody is a tremendously fascinating thing. I mean, what to do with an evening? Okay, you go to the movies and you watch other people loving each other. Why dont you do it yourself? I very rarely go to the movies because my own life is more fun than what I see on the movies. Now, you see what Im doing? Im wringing around a whole lot of subjects and ways of looking at certain topics which show us that it aint necessarily so. Things are not necessarily what they seem. And so we can get in the mood to be open-minded. Now that doesnt mean that youre merely lax in your opinions. True open-mindedness is what Ive tried to explain as mental silence, of being able to be completely surprised by reality. And to observe that it is not at all what you thought it was, or what you were brought up to believe. And not to be afraid when you suddenly discover the obvious, which is that the real you is not the ego, but the eternal center of the universe. Well, well take an intermission now. Once upon a time, there was a Zen student who quoted an old Buddhist poem to his teacher, which says: It would be, of course, much better, if this occasion were celebrated with no talk at all, and if I addressed you in the manner of the ancient teachers of Zen, I should hit the microphone with my fan and leave. But I somehow have the feeling that since you have contributed to the support of the Zen Center, in expectation of learning something, a few words should be said, even though I warn you, that by explaining these things to you, I shall subject you to a very serious hoax. Because if I allow you to leave here this evening, under the impression that you understand something about Zen, you will have missed the point entirely. Because Zen is a way of life, a state of being, that is not possible to embrace in any concept whatsoever, so that any concepts, any ideas, any words that I shall put across to you this evening will have as their object, showing you the limitations of words and of thinking. Now then, if one must try to say something about what Zen is, and I want to do this by way of introduction, I must make it emphatic that Zen, in its essence, is not a doctrine. Theres nothing youre supposed to believe in. Its not a philosophy in our sense, that is to say a set of ideas, an intellectual net in which one tries to catch the fish of reality. Actually, the fish of reality is more like waterit always slips through the net. And in water you know when you get into it theres nothing to hang on to. All this universe is like water; it is fluid, it is transient, it is changing. And when youre thrown into the water after being accustomed to living on the dry land, youre not used to the idea of swimming. You try to stand on the water, you try to catch hold of it, and as a result you drown. The only way to survive in the water, and this refers particularly to the waters of modern philosophical confusion, where God is dead, metaphysical propositions are meaningless, and theres really nothing to hang on to, because were all just falling apart. And the only thing to do under those circumstances is to learn how to swim. And to swim, you relax, you let go, you give yourself to the water, and you have to know how to breathe in the right way. And then you find that the water holds you up; indeed, in a certain way you become the water. And so in the same way, one might say if one attempted toagain I say misleadinglyto put Zen into any sort of concept, it simply comes down to this: That in this universe, there is one great energy, and we have no name for it. People have tried various names for it, like God, like Brahman, like Tao, but in the West, the word God has got so many funny associations attached to it that most of us are bored with it. When people say God the father almighty, most people feel funny inside. So we like to hear new words, we like to hear about Tao, about Brahman, about Shinto, and __-__-__, and such strange names from the far East because they dont carry the same associations of mawkish sanctimony and funny meanings from the past. And actually, some of these words that the Buddhists use for the basic energy of the world really dont mean anything at all. The word tathata (), which is translated from the Sanskrit as suchnessor thusnessor something like that, really means something more like dadada,based on the word tat (), which in Sanskrit means that,and so in Sanskrit it is said tat tvam asi (  ), that thou art,or in modern America, youre it.But da, dathats the first sound a baby makes when it comes into the world, because the baby looks around and says da, da, da, daand fathers flatter themselves and think its saying DaDa,which means Daddy,but according to Buddhist philosophy, all this universe is one dadada.That means ten thousand functions, ten thousand things, one suchness,and were all one suchness. And that means that suchess comes and goes like anything else because this whole world is an on-and-off system. As the Chinese say, its the yang and the yin, and therefore it consists of now you see it, now you dont, here you are, here you arent, here you are,because that the nature of energy, to be like waves, and waves have crests and troughs, only we, being under a kind of sleepiness or illusion, imagine that the trough is going to overcome the wave or the crest, the yin, or the dark principle, is going to overcome the yang, or the light principle, and that offis going to finally triumph over on.And we, shall I say, bug ourselves by indulging in that illusion. Hey, supposing darkness did win out, wouldnt that be terrible!And so were constantly trembling and thinking that it may, because after all, isnt it odd that anything exists? Its most peculiar, it requires effort, it requires energy, and it would have been so much easier for there to have been nothing at all. Therefore, we think well, since being, since the isside of things is so much effortyou always give up after a while and you sink back into death. But death is just the other face of energy, and its the rest, the not being anything around, that produces something around, just in the same way that you cant have solidwithout space,or spacewithout solid.When you wake up to this, and realize that the more it changes the more its the same thing, as the French say, that you are really a train of this one energy, and there is nothing else but that that is you, but that for you to be always you would be an insufferable bore, and therefore it is arranged that you stop being you after a while and then come back as someone else altogether, and so when you find that out, you become full energy and delight. As Blake said, Energy is eternal delight.And you suddenly see through the whole sham thing. You realize youre Thatwe wont put a name on it youre That, and you cant be anything else. So you are relieved of fundamental terror. That doesnt mean that youre always going to be a great hero, that you wont jump when you hear a bang, that you wont worry occasionally, that you wont lose your temper. It means, though, that fundamentally deep, deep, deep down within you, you will be able to be human, not a stone Buddhayou know in Zen there is a difference made between a living Buddha and a stone Buddha. If you go up to a stone Buddha and you hit him hard on the head, nothing happens. You break your fist or your stick. But if you hit a living Buddha, he may say ouch,and he may feel pain, because if he didnt feel something, he wouldnt be a human being. Buddhas are human, they are not devas, they are not gods. They are enlightened men and women. But the point is that they are not afraid to be human, they are not afraid to let themselves participate in the pains, difficulties and struggles that naturally go with human existence. The only difference isand its almost an undetectable differenceit takes one to know one. As a Zen poem says, when two Zen masters meet each other on the street, they need no introduction. When fiends meet, they recognize one another instantly.So a person who is a real cool Zen understands that, does not go around Oh, I understand Zen, I have satori, I have this attainment, I have that attainment, I have the other attainment,because if he said that, he wouldnt understand the first thing about it. So it is Zen that, if I may put it metaphorically, Zhuang Zhou said, the perfect man employs his mind as a mirror. It grasps nothing, it refuses nothing. It receives but does not keep. And another poem says of wild geese flying over a lake, The wild geese do not intend to cast their reflection, and the water has no mind to retain their image.In other words this is to beto put it very strictly into our modern idiomthis is to live without hang-ups, the word hang- upbeing an almost exact translation of the Japanese bono and the Sanskrit klesa, ordinarily translated worldly attachment,though that sounds a little bityou know what I meanit sounds pious, and in Zen, things that sound pious are said to stink of Zen, but to have no hang-ups, that is to say, to be able to drift like a cloud and flow like water, seeing that all life is a magnificent illusion, a plane of energy, and that there is absolutely nothing to be afraid of. Fundamentally. You will be afraid on the surface. You will be afraid of putting your hand in the fire. You will be afraid of getting sick, etc. But you will not be afraid of fear. Fear will pass over your mind like a black cloud will be reflected in the mirror. But of course, the mirror isnt quite the right illustration; space would be better. Like a black cloud flows through space without leaving any track. Like the stars dont leave trails behind them. And so that fundamentalit is called the voidin Buddhism; it doesnt mean voidin the sense that its void in the ordinary sense of emptiness. It means void in that is the most real thing there is, but nobody can conceive it. Its rather the same situation that you get between the speaker, in a radio and all the various sounds which it produces. On the speaker you hear human voices, you hear every kind of musical instrument, honking of horns, the sounds of traffic, the explosions of guns, and yet all that tremendous variety of sounds are the vibrations of one diaphragm, but it never says so. The announcer doesnt come on first thing in the morning and say Ladies and gentlemen, all the sounds that you will hear subsequently during the day will be the vibration of this diaphragm; dont take them for real.And the radio never mentions its own construction, you see? And in exactly the same way, you are never able, really, to examine, to make an object of your own mind, just as you cant look directly into your own eyes or bite your own teeth, because you ARE that, and if you try to find it, and make it something to possess, why thats a great lack of confidence. That shows that you dont really know your it. And if youre it,you dont need to make anything of it. Theres nothing to look for. But the test is, are you still looking? Do you know that? I mean, not as kind of knowledge you possess, not something youve learned in school like youve got a degree, and you know, Ive mastered the contents of these books and remembered it.In this knowledge, theres nothing to be remembered; nothing to be formulated. You know it best when you say I dont know it.Because that means, Im not holding on to it, Im not trying to cling to itin the form of a concept, because theres absolutely no necessity to do so. That would be, in Zen language, putting legs on a snake or a beard on a eunuch, or as we would say, gilding the lily. Now you say, Well, that sounds pretty easy. You mean to say all we have to do is relax? We dont have to go around chasing anything anymore? We abandon religion, we abandon meditations, we abandon this, that, and the other, and just live it up anyhow? Just go on.You know, like a father says to his child who keeps asking Why? Why, Why, Why, Why, Why? Why did God make the universe? Who made God? Why are the trees green?and so on and so forth, and father says finally, Oh, shut up and eat your bun.It isnt quite like that, because, you see, the thing is this: All those people who try to realize Zen by doing nothing about it are still trying desperately to find it, and theyre on the wrong track. There is another Zen poem which says, You cannot attain it by thinking, you cannot grasp it by not thinking.Or you could say, you cannot catch hold of the meaning of Zen by doing something about it, but equally, you cannot see into its meaning by doing nothing about it, because both are, in their different ways, attempts to move from where you are now, here, to somewhere else, and the point is that we come to an understanding of this, what I call suchness, only through being completely here. And no means are necessary to be completely here. Neither active means on the one hand, nor passive means on the other. Because in both ways, you are trying to move away from the immediate now. But you see, its difficult to understand language like that. And to understand what all that is about, there is really one absolutely necessary prerequisite, and this is to stop thinking. Now, I am not saying this in the spirit of being an anti-intellectual, because I think a lot, talk a lot, write a lot of books, and am a sort of half-baked scholar. But you know, if you talk all the time, you will never hear what anybody else has to say, and therefore, all youll have to talk about is your own conversation. The same is true for people who think all the time. That means, when I use the word think,talking to yourself, subvocal conversation, the constant chit-chat of symbols and images and talk and words inside your skull. Now, if you do that all the time, youll find that youve nothing to think about except thinking, and just as you have to stop talking to hear what I have to say, you have to stop thinking to find out what life is about. And the moment you stop thinking, you come into immediate contact with what Korzybski called, so delightfully, the unspeakable world,that is to say, the nonverbal world. Some people would call it the physical world, but these words physical,nonverbal,are all conceptual, not a concept either, its (bangs stick). So when you are awake to that world, you suddenly find that all the so-called differences between self and other, life and death, pleasure and pain, are all conceptual, and theyre not there. They dont exist at all in that world which is (bangs stick). In other words, if I hit you hard enough, ouchdoesnt hurt, if youre in a state of what is called no-thought. There is a certain experience, you see, but you dont call it hurt.Its like when you were small children, they banged you about, and you cried, and they said Dont crybecause they wanted to make you hurt and not cry at the same time. People are rather curious about the things the do like that. But you see, they really wanted you to cry, the same way if you threw up one day. Its very good to throw up if youve eaten something that isnt good for you, but your mother said Enough!and made you repress it and feel that throwing up wasnt a good thing to do. Because then when you saw people die, and everybody around you started weeping and making a fuss, and then you learned from that that dying was terrible. When somebody got sick, everybody else got anxious, and you learned that getting sick was something awful. You learned it from a concept. So the reason why there is in the practice of Zen, what we did before this lecture began, to practice Za-zen, sitting Zen. Incidentally, there are three other kinds of Zen besides Za-zen. Standing Zen, walking Zen, and lying Zen. In Buddhism, they speak of the three dignities of man. Walking, standing, sitting, and lying. And they say when you sit, just sit. When you walk, just walk. But whatever you do, dont wobble. In fact, of course, you can wobble, if you really wobble well. When the old master Hyakujo was asked What is Zen?he said When hungry, eat, when tired, sleep,and they said, Well isnt that what everybody does? Arent you just like ordinary people?Oh no,he said, they dont do anything of the kind. When theyre hungry, they dont just eat, they think of all sorts of things. When theyre tired, they dont just sleep, but dream all sorts of dreams.I know the Jungians wont like that, but there comes a time when you just dream yourself out, and no more dreams. You sleep deeply and breathe from your heels. Now, therefore, Za-zen, or sitting Zen, is a very, very good thing in the Western world. We have been running around far too much. Its all right; weve been active, and our action has achieved a lot of good things. But as Aristotle pointed out long agoand this is one of the good things about Aristotle. He said the goal of action is contemplation.In other words, busy, busy, busy, busy, busy, but whats it all about? Especially when people are busy because they think theyre going somewhere, that theyre going to get something and attain something. Theres quite a good deal of point to action if you know youre not going anywhere. If you act like you dance, or like you sing or play music, then youre really not going anywhere, youre just doing pure action, but if you act with a thought in mind that as a result of action you are eventually going to arrive at someplace where everything will be alright. Then you are on a squirrel cage, hopelessly condemned to what the Buddhists call samsara, the round, or rat-race of birth and death, because you think youre going to go somewhere. Youre already there. And it is only a person who has discovered that he is already there who is capable of action, because he doesnt act frantically with the thought that hes going to get somewhere. He acts like he can go into walking meditation at that point, you see, where we walk not because we are in a great, great hurry to get to a destination, but because the walking itself is great. The walking itself is the meditation. And when you watch Zen monks walk, its very fascinating. They have a different kind of walk from everybody else in Japan. Most Japanese shuffle along, or if they wear Western clothes, they race and hurry like we do. Zen monks have a peculiar swing when they walk, and you have the feeling they walk rather the same way as a cat. Theres something about it that isnt hesitant; theyre going along all right, theyre not sort of vagueing around, but theyre walking just to walk. And thats walking meditation. But the point is that one cannot act creatively, except on the basis of stillness. Of having a mind that is capable from time to time of stopping thinking. And so this practice of sitting may seem very difficult at first, because if you sit in the Buddhist way, it makes your legs ache. Most Westerners start to fidget; they find it very boring to sit for a long time, but the reason they find it boring is that theyre still thinking. If you werent thinking, you wouldnt notice the passage of time, and as a matter of fact, far from being boring, the world when looked at without chatter becomes amazingly interesting. The most ordinary sights and sounds and smells, the texture of shadows on the floor in front of you. All these things, without being named, and saying thats a shadow, thats red, thats brown, thats somebodys foot.When you dont name things anymore, you start seeing them. Because say when a person says I see a leaf,immediately, one thinks of a spearhead-shaped thing outlined in black and filled in with flat green. No leaf looks like that. No leavesleaves are not green. Thats why Lao-Tzu said the five colors make a man blind, the five tones make a man deaf,because if you can only see five colors, youre blind, and if you can only hear five tones in music, youre deaf. You see, if you force sound into five tones, you force color into five colors, youre blind and deaf. The world of color is infinite, as is the world of sound. And it is only by stopping fixing conceptions on the world of color and the world of sound that you really begin to hear it and see it. So thisshould I be so bold as to use the word disciplineof meditation, or zazen, lies behind the extraordinary capacity of Zen people to develop such great arts as the gardens, the tea ceremony, the calligraphy, and the grand painting of the Sum Dynasty, and of the Japanese Sumi tradition. And it was because, especially in tea ceremony, which means literally chanoyu in Japanese, meaning hot water of tea,they found in the very simplest of things in everyday life, magic. In the words of the poet Hokoji, marvelous power and supernatural activity, drawing water, carrying wood.And you know how it is sometimes when you say a word and make the word meaningless, you take the word yesyes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. It becomes funny. Thats why they use the word muin Zen training, which means no.Mu. And you get this going for a long time, and the word ceases to mean anything, and it becomes magical. Now, what you have to realize in the further continuance of Za-zen, that as you Well, let me say first in a preliminary way, the easiest way to stop thinking is first of all to think about something that doesnt have any meaning. Thats my point in talking about muor yes,or counting your breath, or listening to a sound that has no meaning, because that stops you thinking, and you become fascinated in the sound. Then as you get on and you justthe sound onlythere comes a point when the sound is taken away, and youre wide open. Now at that point, there will be a kind of preliminary so-called satori, and you will think wowee, thats it!Youll be so happy, youll be walking on air. When Suzuki Daisetz was asked what was it like to have satori, he said well, its like ordinary, everyday experience, except about two inches off the ground.But theres another saying that the student who has obtained satori goes to hell as straight as an arrow. No satori around here, because anybody who has a spiritual experience, whether you get it through zazen, or through LSD, or anything, you know, that gives you that experience. If you hold on to it, say now Ive got it,its gone out of the window, because the minute you grab the living thing, its like catching a handful of water, the harder you clutch, the faster it squirts through your fingers. Theres nothing to get hold of, because you dont NEED to get hold of anything. You had it from the beginning. Because you can see that, by various methods of meditation, but the trouble is that people come out of that an brag about it, say Ive seen it.Equally intolerable are the people who study Zen and come out and brag to their friends about how much their legs hurt, and how long they sat, and what an awful thing it was. Theyre sickening. Because the discipline side of this thing is not meant to be something awful. Its not done in a masochistic spirit, or a sadistic spirit: suffering builds character, therefore suffering is good for you. When I went to school in England, the basic premise of education was that suffering builds character, and therefore all senior boys were at liberty to bang about the junior ones with a perfectly clear conscience, because they were doing them a favor. It was good for them, it was building their character, and as a result of this attitude, the word disciplinehas begun to stink. Its been stinking for a long time. But we need a kind of entirely new attitude towards this, because without that quiet, and that non- striving, a life becomes messy. When you let go, finally, because theres nothing to hold onto, you have to be awfully careful not to turn into loose yogurt. Let me give two opposite illustrations. When you ask most people to lie flat on the floor and relax, you find that they are at full attention, because they dont really believe that the floor will hold them up, and therefore theyre holding themselves together; theyre uptight. Theyre afraid that if they dont do this, even though the floor is supporting them, theyll suddenly turn into a gelatinous mass and trickle away in all directions. Then there are other people who when you tell them to relax, they go like a limp rag. But you see, the human organism is a subtle combination of hardness and softness. Of flesh and bones. And the side of Zen which has to do with neither doing nor not doing, but knowing that you are It anyway, and you dont have to seek it, thats Zen-flesh. But the side in which you can come back into the world, with this attitude of not seeking, and knowing youre It, and not fall apartthat requires bones. And one of the most difficult thingsthis belongs to of course a generation we all know about that was running about some time agowhere they caught on to Zen, and they started anything-goes painting, they started anything-goes sculpture, they started anything-goes way of life. Now I think were recovering from that today. At any rate, our painters are beginning once again to return to glory, to marvelous articulateness and vivid color. Theres been nothing like it since the stained glass at Chartres. Thats a good sign. But it requires that there be in our daily use of freedom, and Im not just talking about political freedom. Im talking about the freedom which comes when you know that youre It, forever and ever and ever. And itll be so nice when you die, because thatll be a change, but itll come back some other way. When you know that, and youve seen through the whole mirage, then watch out, because there may still be in you some seeds of hostility, some seeds of pride, some seeds of wanting to put down other people, or wanting to just defy the normal arrangements of life. So that is why, in the order of a Zen monastery, various duties are assigned. The novices have the light duties, and the more senior you get, the heavy duties. For example, the Roshi very often is the one who cleans out the benjo, the toilet. And everything is kept in order. There is a kind of beautiful, almost princely aestheticism, because by reason of that order being kept all of the time, the vast free energy which is contained in the system doesnt run amok. The understanding of Zen, the understanding of awakening, the understanding of Well, well call it mystical experiences, one of the most dangerous things in the world. And for a person who cannot contain it, its like putting a million volts through your electric shaver. You blow your mind and it stays blown. Now, if you go off in that way, that is what would be called in Buddhism a pratyeka-buddhaprivate buddha. He is one who goes off into the transcendental world and is never seen again. And hes made a mistake from the standpoint of Buddhism, because from the standpoint of Buddhism, there is no fundamental difference between the transcendental world and this everyday world. The bodhisattva, you see, who doesnt go off into a nirvana and stay there forever and ever, but comes back and lives ordinary everyday life to help other beings to see through it, too, he doesnt come back because he feels he has some sort of solemn duty to help mankind and all that kind of pious cant. He comes back because he sees the two worlds are the same. He sees all other beings as buddhas. He sees them, to use a phrase of G.K. Chestertons, but now a great thing in the street, seems any human nod, where move in strange democracies the million masks of god.And its fantastic to look at people and see that they really, deep down, are enlightened. Theyre It. Theyre faces of the divine. And they look at you, and they say oh no, but Im not divine. Im just ordinary little me.You look at them in a funny way, and here you see the buddha nature looking out of their eyes, straight at you, and saying its not, and saying it quite sincerely. And thats why, when you get up against a great guru, the Zen master, or whatever, he has a funny look in his eyes. When you say I have a problem, guru. Im really mixed up, I dont understand,he looks at you in this queer way, and you think oh dear me, hes reading my most secret thoughts. Hes seeing all the awful things I am, all my cowardice, all my shortcomings.He isnt doing anything of the kind; he isnt even interested in such things. Hes looking at, if I may use Hindu terminology, hes looking at Shiva, in you, saying my god, Shiva, wont you come off it? So then, you see, the bodhisattva, who isIm assuming quite a knowledge of Buddhism in this assemblybut the bodhisattva as distinct from the pratyeka-buddha, bodhisattva doesnt go off into nirvana, he doesnt go off into permanant withdrawn ecstasy, he doesnt go off into a kind of catatonic samadhi. Thats all right. There are people who can do that; thats their vocation. Thats their specialty, just as a long thing is the long body of buddha, and a short thing is the short body of buddha. But if you really understand that Zen, that buddhist idea of enlightenment is not comprehended in the idea of the transcendental, neither is it comprehended in the idea of the ordinary. Not in terms with the infinite, not in terms with the finite. Not in terms of the eternal, not in terms of the temporal, because theyre all concepts. So, let me say again, I am not talking about the ordering of ordinary everyday life in a reasonable and methodical way as being schoolteacherish, and saying if you were NICE people, thats what you would do.For heavens sake, dont be nice people. But the thing is, that unless you do have that basic framework of a certain kind of order, and a certain kind of discipline, the force of liberation will blow the world to pieces. Its too strong a current for the wire. So then, its terribly important to see beyond ecstasy. Ecstasy here is the soft and lovable flesh, huggable and kissable, and thats very good. But beyond ecstasy are bones, what we call hard facts. Hard facts of everyday life, and incidentally, we shouldnt forget to mention the soft facts; there are many of them. But then the hard fact, it is what we mean, the world as seen in an ordinary, everyday state of consciousness. To find out that that is really no different from the world of supreme ecstasy, well, its rather like this:Lets suppose, as so often happens, you think of ecstasy as insight, as seeing light. Theres a Zen poem which says  See? Theres a sudden vision. Satori! Breaking! Wowee! And the doors of the mind are blown apart, and there sits the ordinary old man. Its just little you, you know? Lightning flashes, sparks shower. In one blink of your eyes, youve missed seeing. Why? Because here is the light. The light, the light, the light, every mystic in the world has seen the light.That brilliant, blazing energy, brighter than a thousand suns, it is locked up in everything. Now imagine this. Imagine youre seeing it. Like you see aureoles around buddhas. Like you see the beatific vision at the end of Dantes Paradiso.Vivid, vivid light, so bright that it is like the clear light of the void in the Tibetan Book of the Dead. Its beyond light, its so bright. And you watch it receding from you. And on the edges, like a great star, there becomes a rim of red. And beyond that, a rim of orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet. You see this great mandala appearing this great sun, and beyond the violet, theres black. Black, like obsidian, not flat black, but transparent black, like lacquer. And again, blazing out of the black, as the yang comes from the yin, more light. Going, going, going. And along with this light, there comes sound. There is a sound so tremendous with the white light that you cant hear it, so piercing that it seems to annihilate the ears. But then along with the colors, the sound goes down the scale in harmonic intervals, down, down, down, down, until it gets to a deep thundering base which is so vibrant that it turns into something solid, and you begin to get the similar spectrum of textures. Now all this time, youve been watching a kind of thing radiating out. But,it says, you know, this isnt all I can do,and the rays start dancing like this, and the sound starts waving, too, as it comes out, and the textures start varying themselves, and they say, well, youve been looking at this this as Ive been describing it so far in a flat dimension. Lets add a third dimension; its going to come right at you now. And meanwhile, it says, were not going to just do like this, were going to do little curlicues. And it says, well, thats just the beginning!Making squares and turns, and then suddenly you see in all the little details that become so intense, that all kinds of little subfigures are contained in what you originally thought were the main figures, and the sound starts going all different, amazing complexities of sound all over the place, and this things going, going, going, and you think youre going to go out of your mind, when suddenly it turns into... Why, us, sitting around here. Thank you very much. When I last talked about Zen I was discussing it as a dialogue between master and student, and I was discussing it to a great extent in relation to Far Eastern culture: how it is, in effect, a method of liberation from the culture. All of us need to be liberated from our culture to a certain extent, because education is a kind of necessary evil. And when the process of educationor acculturationhas been completed, we need a cure for it. Education is like salting meat in order to preserve it for eating. But when youre ready to cook it and eat it, you need to soak some of the salt out. So in the process of being brought up by ones parents and ones teachers you are in one way spoiledalthough, in another way, made tolerable to live with. And so in our culture its increasingly fashionable to have psychoanalysis when youre finished with education, so as to work out and resolve all the damage and traumatic shocks that were done to you in the process. And its becoming something thatin sophisticated circlesone goes through, not because youre a mentally sick person, but because its considered beneficial to general mental health. And this is our fumbling attempt, you see, to find a cure for our own culture. We need a cure, of course, because the thing that we lose in the course of being brought up is spontaneity. Thats whats so delightful about a child, as well as so objectionablethat children are just plain spontaneous. And when they do it in a way that pleases us we think theyre delightful. And when they do it in a way that doesnt please us we think theyre horrid. And so we pretty much kill the spontaneity in them in order to getcertainly, that they wont be horrid, and that they will be nice, but in a rather phony way. And this is such a disaster, isnt it? Because when we watch a childsay, dancingand its never learned; never had a single dancing lesson, and is really just dancing for fun, we say, thats delightful. Then, eventually, the child notices that this is a way of getting attention and becomes self-conscious about dancing, and then we send it to dancing school, and it becomes stiff and wretched. And only after many, many years of practice does the childas a dancer, now a young man or womanrecapture the spontaneity of childhood. Got to go all that long way around to get back to the thing that it once had. And thats terribly difficult. So in the same way, we might say the general attitude to life, that a child is taught to live as the child is taught to dance. It has to observe the rules. And in so doing this thing arises that bugs us human beings beyond belief. That is: self-consciousness. Self-consciousness is, in one sense, our pride as human beings. Its the great thing we have. We cannot only be happy, but we can know were happy. We cannot only think, but we can think about thinking. And therein lies the whole possibility in reasoning: to think about thinking, to know about knowing, to be aware of what one does. Herein is the whole birth of a rational control of behavior, which you might say is the glory of civilization and the glory of man. But at the same time its a perfect pest, because how do you know when to stop thinking about thinking? For instance, you think over a problem; youve got to make a decision. How long should you think about it? How much evidence should you collect before you take a step? You never know. Actually, what most of us do is we think about a given decision until its a nuisance, or the time is too late to think about it anymore, and then we do something. We never are sure that we decided the right thing, and one of the troubles about thinking decisions is there are ever so many unpredictable variables that come into everything. And you may work out the most perfect business contract, and everything is fine, but you didnt bargain for the banana skin that you were going to slip on on your way to your partners office, or whatever it was. Such things couldnt be predicted in any amount of decision-making, and the more we try to elaborate perfectly foolproof methods of arranging our lives, the more we find ourselves encumbered with impossible details. Thats the fallacy of too much law. When we provide for everything in the law, [we] suddenly find you cant move without filling out 300 forms, and without consulting all sorts of bureaucrats, without hiring a staff of lawyers and accountants, and all kinds of things; to be sure you dont make the wrong move. After a while, the game ceases to be worth the candle. And life becomes so safe that its not worth living at all. So this is one of the problems of being self-conscious. And all education, you see, is an instruction in self-consciousness. What do you learn in education? You learn, fundamentally, words. In other words, symbols about reality. And through words were able to talk about living, and so think about living, and so have knowledge about it. You see, no knowledge is academically respectable knowledge unless its knowledge in terms of words or in terms of numbers. That is to say, in terms of symbolic language about life. But you see, once youre in that position, once you know that you know, and you know youre alive, and you know youre gonna diebecause you can predictyou feel youve lost your innocence. Somethings gone wrong. This, in the Christian tradition, was the knowledge of good and evil. What it says in Hebrew is not exactly moral good and evil that was known as a result of eating the fruit of the tree, but what was advantageous and disadvantageous. It gave you the gift of being like God, that is to say, the gift of being able to control the course of events. And anybody who controls the course of events, you see, probably puts themself in the situation of the sorcerers apprentice. The Lord, looking at you down there and says, Okay, you wanted to be God. Man, you go ahead and try. And you get in more and more of a mess. You know, you succeed amazingly. Just like the sorcerers apprentice actually made that broom go and fetch water for it. But he couldnt stop it. And as we say today, You cant stop progress. So, then, the whole problem of self-consciousness is that youre always in a dither and a doubt. We call this anxiety. And a nostalgia develops among us for the age of innocence. Wouldnt it be nice not to have to make any decisions? To act entirely on whim? And if you got into troublewell, that would be alright, because you wouldntve been worrying about it. See, when a moth mistakes a candle for its sex callwhich is what happens; thats why moths fly into candlesthe moth makes a mistake and powie, it goes out. Thats that. [The] moth doesnt worry on the way to the candle whether its going to get burned. And of course, the moths are sufficiently prolific so that one moth more or less lost in a candle doesnt matter. Hundreds of moths lost in candles dont matter. They just go on. So you might imagine a human civilization where people make mistakesand yes, they go off with a glorious bang instead of a whimper. And thats that. They wouldnt worry. Theyd live magnificently. But we cant possibly go back and do that. You cant on purpose give up self-consciousness, you cant give up worrying, you cant give up thinking about yourself, and above all youre terrified to live spontaneously because you might do something wrong. However, the center of Zen training is to live spontaneously. And this is why its so fascinating to many Western people, especially Western intellectuals, who are overburdened with self-consciousness. Because what fascinated people about Zen, when they first heard of it through Dr. Suzukis writings, were Zen stories. I lent a book of Zen stories once to a friend of mine, years and years ago, and he was in [the] hospital. And when he gave it back to me he said, Geez, I didnt understand a word of it, but it cheered me up enormously. So the literature of Zen, especially the literature of Zen in its early days in the Tang Dynasty in China, was a literature that runs from approximately 700 A.D. to 1,000 A.D. This span of years is the golden age of Zen, and almost all the literature of the periodin early Buddhist Chineseis anecdotes about the encounters of Zen masters with their students. They are called in Japanese mond (), which means question-answer. And it appears that the way of studying Zen in those days was rather unlike the way of studying it now. Now, Zen is settled and is studied in communitiessuch as [the ones] weve been looking at, and will be staying in tomorrow night. But in those days, Zen was a wandering thing. In other words, if you became a Zen monk, you did a great deal of traveling. And instead of sitting on your fanny most of the day, you trudged. You were walking along through prairies, mountain paths, rugged country; you were visiting master after master after master, to find one who would answer your question. Now, in a very natural waysupposing a person is questing; you are a seeker. Youre not a phony seeker, but a real seekerthat is to say, you have within you a burning desire to find out what its all about. Who you are, what life is, what reality is, or whats the way out of the mess. You want to becomeinstead of a mixed-up human beingyou want to become something as simple and genuine as a tiger, or a cat, or a bird, or a Buddha. So those monks used to wander, and wander, and wander in search of a man who would answer the question. So one of the first stories is that when Bodhidharmaor Daruma, who you see all over Japan as the man with big eyes, a bushy beard, usually dressed in red, with no legshe [Alan mistakenly says Bodhidharma visited himself. The person asking Bodhidharma for advice referred to here is Taiso Eka] came to where Bodhidharma was meditating and said, Master, I have no peace of mind. Please pacify my mind. Of course, he didnt even get in for a long time to ask the question, because Bodhidharma refused to see anybody. Finally, when he cut off his left arm as a token of his sincerity and presented it to the master, Bodhidharma said, you know, All right, what do you want? Well, he said, I have no peace of mind. The mind, in Chinese, is xn (), and it isnt quite what we mean by mind. They locate it here [the heart]; Japanese kokoro (). We locate our mind here [the head]. But this mind here, the heart-mind, is the psychic center. When you say Ive no peace of mind it doesnt mean youve just got a headache. You may have a heartache, too. Its a more inclusive word; you might call it the center of psychic activity. So Bodhidharma said to this man, whose name was Eka, Bring out your mind here before me. Ill pacify it. And Eka said, When I look for my mind I cant find it. Bodhidharma said, There, its pacified. Now somehow, this answered Ekas question. And all Zen is stories like that. Now one thing I must tell you about these stories: they are of the same nature as jokes. That is to say, a joke is told with the object of making you laugh. Laughter is not an intellectual thing, it is an emotional reaction. And the point is the emotional reaction. If, therefore, a joke is explained to you, you may laugh out of politeness; a throaty laughbut you will not laugh spontaneously; a belly laugh. Now, the object of Zen stories is not to produce laughter, but to produce awakening, clarification, enlightenment, or what is called in Japanese satori. Satori is, like laughter, something that happens suddenly. You dontas a ruleslowly begin to laugh and then laugh louder and louder. Because you see a joke instantly. A joke is always a matter of an a-ha! So in the same way, these stories are intended to produce an a-ha reaction in you of Oh, but I see! Now its clear! And really, they dont contain any information. Their design is not to tell you somethingthat is to say, to impart information or knowledge. Their design is to get rid of something. To get rid of a false problem with which you are wrestling, so that the problem will disappear as a result of understanding the story. And, you see from the story that I told you that what happened was the disappearance of a problem. Because Eka, when he looked for his mind that was giving him so much trouble, couldnt find it. Now then, these stories go on in the most amazing ways, and I might retell a fewalthough some of them may be familiar to you. Ill try and choose ones that are probably less familiar. There was a master walking in the forest with a group of his disciples, and suddenly he picked up a tree branch and said to one of the monks, What is it? And the monk hesitated; didnt answer immediately, so the teacher hit him with it. So he turned to another monk and said, What is it? And the monk said, Give it to me, so that I can see. And the master tossed him the branch. He caught it and he hit the master with it. And so the master said, Well, you got out of that dilemma. There was another occasion where an officer of the army came to a Zen master and said, Sir, I have heard a very strange story and I want to know your answer to it. Once upon a time there was a man who kept a goose in a bottle. And it grew so large that he couldnt get it out. Now, he didnt want to break the bottle and he didnt want to hurt the goose, so how does he get it out? And the master changed the subject and said something like, you know, Its a nice day today, isnt it? The waterfalls making a lovely sound outside. And so they went on, in pleasant conversation. And then the officer got up to leave, and as he walked away to the door the master said, Oh, officer? And he turned around and said, Yes? And the master said, There! Its out! Another time there was a famous master called Suibi, and he was asked, What is the secret teaching of Buddhism? And he was asked this in the lecture hall, you know, where other monks were studying. And he said, Wait until theres no one around and Ill tell you. So, later in the day, the monk accosted him and said, Theres nobody around now. What is the secret teaching of Buddhism? So he went into the garden with this monk, and he pointed at the bamboos. And the monk said, I dont understand. He said, What a tall one that is. What a short one that is. And this awakened the monk. Then there was another monk, whose name was Gutei, and whenever people came to ask him [a] question about Buddhism, hed hold up a finger. That was the only answer hed give. Well, he had an attendant. And one day somebody came to the temple to inquire about the teaching being given there, and the master was apparently out, and his attendant was there. So the investigator said, What is your teaching here? And the attendant held up a finger. Well, actually, the master had been there; he was peeking from behind a screen. And so he came out to this boy and said, Whats the fundamental teaching of Buddhism? And the boy held up a finger. Instantly, the master drew a knife and cut it off. And the boy was very dismayed and rushed away, yelling. So the master said, Hey, come back! So he came back. He said, Whats the fundamental principle of Buddhism? And he went to hold up the finger and it wasnt there. And he was enlightened. There is a Chinese god whose name is Ping-Ting, and this is the god of fire. And there was a monk who was traveling, and he came to a new masterhe had been to someone elseand he said, Well, who did you study with before you came to me? Oh, he said, I studied with so-and-so. He said, What did he teach you? Well, he said, when I asked about the fundamental meaning of Buddhism he answered me, Ping-Ting comes for fire. Well, the master said, That was an excellent answer, but I bet you didnt understand it. Oh yes, he said, I understood it. Because Ping-Ting is the god of fire. And if Ping-Ting should ask for fire, that would be like me asking about Buddhism, because Im really a Buddha already. The master shook his head. I knew it, he said, you missed the point completely. Well, he said, how would you deal with it? The master said, You ask me. So the monk said, What is the fundamental principle of Buddhism? And the master said, Ping-Ting comes for fire, And the monk got the point. Well, you know, you can go on with these stories indefinitely. But youll notice certain dynamics in them. They require, as a rule, a solution to a dilemma. Or they do something that creates what we would call a state of blockage. When youre posed with something completely unusual, and you dont know how to react to it in a normal, automatic way. You see, if somebody says to you, in the street, Good morning, you say Good morning, and youre not being spontaneous, youre being merely automatic. When somebody comes up to you and says, Are you saved? Or Do you accept Jesus Christ as your personal savior? Its a very unusual question and it stalls most people. They say, Well, what do you mean? Or something funny like that. They feel embarrassed by religious questions. Somebody might say to you, Why have you got such long toenails?when youre wearing a shoe and nobody can see it, you see? Anything that absolutely disrupts the normal flow of interchange. Well, then youre nonplussed. And the object of Zen is never to be nonplussed. Thatsyou see, to be nonplussed is the real meaning of the Buddhist doctrine of whats called bonn in Japanese, which means entanglements or defilements. Or attachments, we might call them. Worldly attachments. It is not a worldly attachment, in Buddhist philosophy, to enjoy dinner. That is natural, you see? It is not a worldly attachment to need to sleep. That is perfectly natural. But it is worldly attachment to be sticky. Thats to say, to be like a wheel that sticks on the axle and squeaks. So we are sticky when we are, in a certain way, self-conscious. We are, as we would say, all balled up or all clutched up, and weve lost our original spontaneity. And we are not, as it were, flowing with the stream of the Taothe course of nature, or whatever you want to call it. So then all these questions put you in a dilemma. And the point is to see if you can get out of the dilemma without a moments hesitation. That doesnt mean doing it quickly, necessarily, because if youre in a hurry to give a quick answer, that itself is a form of blockage. You should all read, in this connection, a translation in Suzukis book Zen and Japanese Culture, of a letter written by Takuan, who invented pickled radishesI told you about, you know? Those yellow daikons are called takuan, after this man. And he wrote a letter on the art of swordsmanship where he explains the necessity of spontaneity in fencing is that, if you have to stop to think about how youre going to respond to a certain kind of attack, its too late. Youll be dead. You must respond in the same way as when you clap your hands: the sound comes out without a moments hesitation. Or when you strike steel on flint, there is no waiting before the spark comes out. But he adds: if you try to be quick, this itself will be a block. You may notice that when people are trained in the use of the sword, they get what Anne Clark bought the other daywhich is a bamboo swordto start with. And you can give a person a healthy clobber with the bamboo sword without actually ruining him. The teacher may well have you work around the house doing various chores as a sort of janitor when you begin in sword school, and will take every possible occasion to surprise you and hitting you with a bamboo sword. And youre expected to defend yourself with anything available. With the cushion, with a broom, with a saucepan, anything you happen to be handlingdefend yourself, immediately. Well after a while, you know, if youre going around your everyday work expecting to be jumped on any minute, [it] becomes rather nerve-wracking. Especially if youre thinking all the time about wheres it going to come from next? And you discover that the more you make plans and try to calculate where its going to hit you next, you will always be outwitted because the teacher is infinitely clever and will always come from an unexpected direction. So at last there arrives a point where you just give up. You stop planning. And you just go around, relaxed, and if it hits, it hits! And then youre ready to start fencing. Another story told about this is the story of the woodcutter and the animal, whose name was Satori. There was once a woodcutter working in a clearing in a forest, when he saw a strange animal peeking at him from behind a bush. And, thinking to have this animal for dinner, he rushed at it with his axe. And the animal laughed from the opposite side of the clearing. Because this animal had the power to read thoughts. And therefore, wherever the woodsman intended to go, the animal read his thought first. And so the animal began to talk, and mocked him and said, You think Im going to be [in] this place next, because the woodsman naturally thought, When I see him next, instead of going to where he is, Ill go to the opposite side of the clearing. And so this went on until the woodsman got absolutely furious, and he returned to chopping the wood. And the animal laughed and said, So youve given up! And just at that moment, as he whanged the axe against the tree, the head flew off and struck the animal dead. Thats the way you have to attain Zen.  So you see what happened here? The boy who studies swordsmanship is put in this impossible situation where he cant do anything right. Everything he does is wrong. And therefore, after finding this outthat nothing will do because its all self-conscioushe gives up. Then he can be spontaneous. But you see, what is provided is the trainingwhy the training of Zen people is disciplined is that, were going, first of all, to be spontaneous within limits. See, out in society you cant do that. Because people will be just bugged by you if you say exactly what you feel and always act the truth. You wont be liked. And you may indeed do very dangerous things. But the St, or the Zen training school, is set up so its a walled-in situation where one is allowed to be spontaneous within certain limits. And the crucial moment is what is called the sanzen interview, which is a restricted interview; its very formal. But in the climax of that interview no holds are barred. It is a personal interchange where fundamental honesty is the crux of the whole thing. Now you see, as I explained last time, that is a very buggy situation. Because the more you wonder whether youre going to be fundamentally honest, the more you get cold feet. Supposing you were allowed an interview with God, and allowed to ask one question, what would you ask? And really think it over, you know? If you go into this and think, What would I ask? You know? Its got to be really important. Its got to be the fundamental question to you. What is it that you basically want to know? And you start thinking about that, and thinking about that, and the more you think about it, the more you dont know what you would ask. Youd say, Well thats a silly question, isnt it? I know what he would say to that. You think about another one and think, Eh, its a curiously interesting question; I dont suppose anybody knows the answer to it. But after all, its only just idle curiosity. I dont think Ill ask that one. Then you think of another question, and think about that for a while, and then you realize its a question that doesnt mean anything. That would be a waste of breath, and of a great opportunity. And you go through it, and through it, and through it, until you think about all the questions you might ask. Its the samevery much soif you visit a great master. You know, you might get an interview with a Zen master while youre here, and with the advantage of an interpreter present. What are you going to ask him? Youve got just this one chance. What do you want to know? I remember a friend of mine who went to Yamazaki Rshi, who used to be at Shkoku-ji. He saidwhen he got in therehe said, You know, I feel so silly. He said, I havent got any questions to ask you. I just feel like laughing. And Yamazaki said, Good! Lets laugh! And he broke into a great bellow. And, you know, there it is. This is what I want to emphasize about this, because there are ever so many facets of Zen that are so easily misunderstood just through reading about it. Theres one school of people that will emphasize the spontaneity of it and think, gee, this Zen is real groovy stuff! It means you just do anything you like. Its true, you see, that certain of the great Zen masters have saidRinzai made this point very stronglyhe said, In Zen there is no place for discipline, or for Buddhism, or for making efforts. You just eat when youre hungry, sleep when youre tired, move your bowels when nature calls. Fools will laugh at me, but the wise will understand. See? You read that. Next thing you know, somebody comes here to Japan to study Zen, and suddenly they write back letters about hours and hours of sitting in one position, and being banged about with warning sticks, and having to get up at ghastly four in the morning, and wash in cold water, and having a very spare diet, and having to do things, behave and move just exactly so, and all that side of it is emphasized. People think, whats going on? Is it this or is it that? Is it one thing or is it the other? The answer is its both. It does have discipline, especially in view of the factand do bear this in mind: most Zen monks today are not really in the monastery of their own volition, and have not been for hundreds of years. Theyve been there because it was a family tradition. Youre a priest and you have a son; well, in all traditional culturesin India, in China, and so ontheres a tendency for the son to carry on his fathers business. So if youre the son of a priest its sort of expected that youll be one, too. So, off to the monastery with you. It was the same in England in the 18th century, where the oldest son in the family went into the army, the second son into the lawI forget which order it wasand the third son, anyway, went into the ministry. Well, that means a whole lot of people were in theological school who havent got the slightest interest in religion. Not real interest. And so they have to be taught to think. So St. Ignatius, for example, made out methods of meditation. A, B, C, D. Approximate consideration, remote consideration, the meditation itself, the resolution at the endthis is simply designed to teach people how to think who have never thought, and werent interested in thinking. So in much the same way, these things have occurred in the far east. And a great deal of it is therefore designed to discipline people who have no real motivation for the discipline in question; the study in question. So now, one of the great features of Zen training is to develop within yourself what is called a great doubt. And the kan system is used to develop a great doubt. Here you are, you know; youre asked to hear the sound of one hand. If youre an American and you come over to Japan to study Zen, youve gone to a lot of trouble. You obviously have some sincere motivation, and you just cant get the answer to that one hand thing, and it becomes more a matter of life and death because it seems terribly important to find this out. So you have a great doubt; that is to say, you have an urgent spirit of inquiry. And you cant get it, and you cant get it, and you cant get itthe teacher keeps saying, Now cmon, cmon, lets go. Lets be ready to give your life for this thing But you see, if you go into a Zen monastery and you dont have that spirit of inquiry that led you across the ocean at a great deal of expense, you were just someone who was brought upone of the boys in the neighborhoodand he went into the monastery. Well then the teacher says, The trouble with you is you dont have a great doubt. Of course he doesnt have a great doubt; hes not interested. So he learns to cultivate a great doubt. See, its like trying toif I may put it in Western or Christian terminology: you dont love God. Youve never seen him, you dont know anything about God. Howwhy the devil would you love God? Somebody comes along and says Youve got to love God, you know! Its terribly important. Its the first commandment. Oh, gee, Ive got to love God! So what do we do? We sit down and say, Dear God, I love you. Dear God, I love you. Dear God, I love you. Dear God, I love you. Cmon, cmon, Ive got to get this feeling going. And then the preacher can tell all sorts of stories, you see, and move you; terrify you with the fear of hell if you dont love God. Or he could say how beautiful Jesus was. That was the revelation of God. Now, you ought to love that! Like you ought to love your mother ([you] probably hate her guts). So you see, you get this thing. Work on that great doubt. Well you see, the trouble is you cant get a great doubt to order. You cant tell anybody anything to order. If you could, do you know [what would happen]? Supposing you were at music school. What are they trying to do in music school? Theyre trying to find methods for teaching creative musicianship. Whether youre a player, or whether youre a composer, or whatever. They want to find out how they can make every student a genius. Actually, all schools are run for the advantage of the staff. And, you know, its a job. Youve got to put people through there; its a way of keeping them off the labor market. But if youre a very sincere teacher you want to find out how to impart that subtle thing to the student. So there are books galore on methodsspecial methodsfor getting that creative ability across. Professor So-And-Sos method, Doctor So-And-Sos method, et cetera, playing the piano, and so on, make it easy but make him a genius. Now if such a method existed, you know what would happen? These geniuses would all be boring. Because we would know how they do it. And the whole fascination of an art, and of a great performance, is you dont know how its done. There must be something about it that is fundamentally astonishing. You could sayagain, putting it into Western termsif God could explain how he created the universe, he wouldnt be God. And you know how, in the Book of Genesis, its toldits told so straightforwardlythat when the Lord first of all creates the things, and then looks at them afterwards and sees that theyre good. And you know, I love the passage where suddenly he creates great whales. You know, suddenlygreat whales! Whoopslike that! And he looks at these things and says, My, thats great! Do it again! So in this way, theres a Zen poem which says, And another says, So there is this curious thing in allwhat I would callvital knowledge; living knowledge. That its always a mystery to itself. Life is a mystery to itself. For the same reason, you see, that theres a Zen poem which says, So in this way, what there isfundamentally; basic realityknows itself and doesnt know itself. If it did know itself thoroughly it would stop. Like playing games. If you know the outcome of a game for sure theres no point playing it. So you know, when master chessplayers sit down and it becomes apparentalthough there are still many pieces on the boardthat one of them is going to mate in three moves, they abandon the game because they know the outcome. If you knew the future perfectly, you knew everything youre going to do right up to the day of your death, youd say, Lets check out on this game. Lets commit suicide and start another life. Because theres no point living through what is known completely. Of course, you cant very well live through what is unknown completely; there must be some light. But total light annihilates itself. So then, you see, there is no prescription. No infallible technique for teaching anybody music, although there are music schools. And there is, likewise, no infallible technique for teaching anybody Zen, although indeed there are Zen schools. And sometimes the teacher, who is many years experienced, begins to gets disillusioned. Whats the point of all these schools; whats the point of teaching music? You cant teach music. You can only pass it on from one person to another by osmosis. Sure, theres a technique you can learn how to read, you can learn how to put your fingers on the banjobut the real thing, what to do with that technique, what to say with ityou cant teach that. So one assumes, then, that a person who is sufficiently motivated, who is fond of music, will learn the technique because he wants to get so where he can handle the instruments. And you suppose, likewise, that a person who is really interested in self-knowledgeafter all, Zen is only a certain way of self-knowledgewill master certain techniques because hes interested.But you see, all schools and all systems begin to make techniques an end in themselves, because technique is the only thing you can teach. You cant teach the thing. Now you see, we get scared when we think of that. Do you mean to say I might be that person who gets hung up in this? And all Im going to get out of this school is technique? Somehow I might be that dumb bunny who just doesnt get this thing? Thats an awful thought, isnt it? Because thats drilled into us from childhood; for example, it comes out in toilet training. I remember all medical and nursing authorities, when I was a small boy, had tremendous constipation phobia, and they believed that you could suffer from poisoning, you know, from retaining things too long. And so they were alway, always agitating, questioning every day as to whether you had been. So you built up, conversely, a terror that you might not be able to. And this, in its turn, built up tensions that were actually constipating. And so everybody was constantly being filled with cscara sagrada, California syrup of figs, castor oilbombshells in every description, which upset the natural functionings. So, in the same way, you might think Im going to practice meditations, or something, and study Zen. But will I be the poor fool who never gets the point? Or you could put it in Christian terms and say Well, Ill be as good as I can be, but perhaps I will be the one whom God will never give any real grace to, because I havent been picked out. And will I get this grace? Theres no way, you see, that you can wrangle grace. You cant compel the Lord to give it. In the same way you cant compel satori to happen. You think, Maybe it wont happen to me. Thats possible, you see. So what do you do about that? Well, the teachers have all sorts of things to say about what to do about it. They say, Well, now look: just forget about it. It doesnt matter if you dont get it. Not getting it is getting it, you see? They use this paradox all the time. Not to have itreally, to accept that you dont have itthats getting it; thats the real point, you see? But thats a gimmick. See, Im going to try as hard as I can not to try to get it. See? But youre really playing a game. At last, Ive got the infallible method! There must be an infallible method, because if there isnt a method were lost; were up the creek! Why? Because were out of control. But you see, when you find out there isnt a methodthere isnt a positive method and there isnt a negative methodwhat are you going to do? You cant do something and you cant do nothing. You cant let go of the thing because, after all, you got curious about it. And this is whats called having swallowed a ball of hot iron. You cant gulp it down and you cant spit it out. And Zen is a trap to get you into that state. You be very careful how you get mixed up with the thing, because you may end up in a padded cell, blathering. That is the quandary, and thats why ever-silly opposite things can be said about Zen. Thats why, on the one hand, it can be said rightly that its a strong discipline, while on the other hand it can be said rightly that its not a discipline at all. And it isnt that its just a mixture of things. Zen isnt sort of partly discipline and partly spontaneity. Whatever is said about it can be said of all of it. And therefore it seems to be paradoxical. And one can always get into difficulty by neglecting some side of it and saying, Well, that doesnt matter. Sometimes its true that it doesnt matter. Sometimes its not true; it may be just the thing that you needthe side you say that doesnt matter. So theres no waywhat Im trying to say is: theres no way of putting your finger on this thing. Theres no way of nailing it down, and thats the whole point. Because you see, fundamentally, Zen makes you do what you were doing all the time, only it makes you do it consistently. Supposing youre sitting in your padded cell and you suddenly found out this little game. See? Youve got your one hand clasped by the other and your thumb sticking out here, at the top. You look at that thumb and say, Ooh, look at thatwhoops! And then try and catch it. Now youve got itno. No. Here we go! No. No. Cmon, lets get it! Cmon, lets get it! Cmon, lets get it! Get it, get it, get it! Get that thing! Get thatsee? Whew. Thats what were doing, see? Heres me, and heres knowing about me. No, I want to try and control myself, you see? I want to get a hold of that thing thats me. Because when I get a hold of it I can control it, and then Im going to be alright. Gotta get a hold of it. And so were doing that. And as a result we have astounding illusions. Now, we have the illusion because its ruled into us through acculturation that each one of us is a separate ego, separate center of awareness, little living pulp of some kind, that lives in a strange world. Scares the hell out of us. What makes you think this, you see? How did you ever come to imagine that you are somehow disconnected, out there, surrounded by this world in which youre a stranger? See, its really obvious that that isnt so, only its not obvious to most people. Its really obvious that youthe real you, deep inis this thing that is reality. And that youre having a profoundly interesting game pretending youre not. And youre going through all kinds of amazing mazes to play this game, and mostly running in terror from your own shadow. Jumping at the sound of your own heartbeat. Having goosepimples rise on your back at the sound of your own footsteps. Wow! And you are always exploring into this world and finding it gets stranger and stranger as you look out into the infinitudes of space, where you thought everything was pretty rationalyou know, these other galaxies that were millions of light years awayyou thought, Well, thats just a lot of galaxies out there. Suddenly, something called a quasar turns up. Nobody understands what a quasar is; they defy all the things that we thought we knew. And so it get stranger and stranger. And the more you probe inwardlyyou know, you sort of lift the skin off your own stomach and take a look inside. What a weird world that is. And we say, Oohw, cover that up! That makes me feel I feel like I feel when I see spiders, or ants, or something. You get the shivers and the creeps from it. But you see, what youre getting the creeps at is yourself in an unfamiliar aspect. The unknown side. Because at last comes recognition. The most far-out thing, the thing that seems the most totally otherand you say, Why, thats me! And what a relief. But at the same time: what fun to begin all over again! Tonight, at any rate, weve got to go through some theoretical materials, so were on a head trip. I dont know where the trip will end up; it depends on you. But in order to lay the foundation for this, weve got to examine ideas that are basic to our common sense. Ideas are very powerful. Its not only emotions that are powerful in human life. Psychoanalysis has, of course, examined the emotional basis of human opinions and beliefs, but one should also examine the intellectual basis of psychological principles, or theories, or therapies. Because everybody who speaks a language at all, has underneath the surface of the languageor the figuring that he usescertain basic assumptions which are usually unexamined. And these unexamined systems of belief are extremely powerful in their influence over our lives.  Well begin with one very common idea thats built into our common sense, which is that the worldthe physical worldconsists of two aspects, respectively: form and matter. This was foisted on us by Aristotle and also by the Bible, because it is said that God created man out of the dust of the Earth and, as it were, made a figurine in his own image, and then breathed the breath of life into its nostrils, so that this form of clay became a living being. And so underneath that lies the notion that everything material is made of some sort of basic stuff, like clay is the basis of pots. And for centuries scientists [and] philosophers wanted to know: what is that stuff? What are we made of? Now, look here: a carpenter makes tables out of wood, and a potter makes pots out of clay. But I ask you: is a tree made of wood? Obviously not. A tree is wood. Its not made of it. Is a mountain made of rock? Obviously not, it is rock. See, our language contains innumerable ghosts.  Supposing I say the lightning flashes. Surely, the flashing is the same as the lightning. There is not one thing called lightning and another called flashing. The lightning is the flashing. It is raining. What is this it that is raining? The raining. I can make a noun out of a verb anytime by turning it into a gerund. So we populate the world with ghosts which arise out of the structure of our language, and thusthereforeof the structure of our thinking, because we think in language, or in figuring; in numbers. And so its of intensely fascinating investigation to find out what are the hidden assumptions that underly language and figuring? In other words, language and mathematics.  And here is this basic assumption, you see, that is almost with us all. It comes again and again into our everyday speech that form, pattern, organization, organisms are made of something, as if there were some inert, primordial, andof coursestupid stuff which had to be put into shape by an energy and an intelligence other than this stuff. Like the intelligence of the potter shapes the clay. So therefore we have a basic picture of the world in which everything is being pushed around. Theres a boss. Theres somebody in charge who is different from what that somebody is in charge of, and puts everything into shape because our common sense does not allow that things shape themselves. Very odd.  In Chinese, the word for nature is zrn (), which is that which is so of itselfthe spontaneous. The Chinese have no difficulty in thinking about nature as self-shaping. A Chinese child would not ask its mother how was I made? It would ask its mother how did I grow? Which would be quite different, you see? So to be made is to be commanded, and therefore every good being obeys. Whether you obey God, or whether you obey the laws of natureyou obey. And an analog, therefore, of the world that has been put into our common sense is one of military command. Note that. Because the image of GodI would go further and say the idolatrous image of God, which has been handed down to usis one of the beneficent tyrant. The boss, big papa.  So, then, when our physicists started to find out what stuff was, they went into it, and into it, and examined it with ever more minute instruments. They first started cutting up things with knives, and cutting them smaller and smaller and smaller until the particle they wanted to dissect was exactly the same width as the edge of the knife. And so they got an atom, and that word in Greektomos ()means the non-cuttable. : non, tomos: cuttable. Thats the basic atom: what you cant cut anymore, because you got down to the end. Well, they werent satisfied with that. So they got an tomosin other words, a particle of something or other that was just the same width as the blade of the knife edgeand they looked at it under a microscope. And they saw that it was[it] seemed to be composed of more, small particles. So they found out means of working those out, and then they found out extraordinary means of investigating the properties of matter. Then they reached a point where they couldnt decide whether it was particles or whether it was waves. So they called them wavicles. They thought they had come to certain ultimate wavicles, called electrons. But then, unfortunately, everything fell apart and they found protons, mesons, and many other extraordinary things. Because, of course, what they didnt realize, was that as you make more and more powerful microscopic instruments, the universe has to get smaller and smaller in order to escape the investigation. Just as when the telescopes become more and more powerful, the galaxies have to recede in order to get away from the telescopes. Because what is happening in all these investigations is: through us, and through our eyes and senses, the universe is looking at itself. And when you try to turn around to see your own head, what happens? You see? It runs away. You never get at it. You cant bite your own teeth. You cant touch the tip of this finger with the tip of this finger. This is the principle.  Shankara explains it beautifully in his commentary on the Kena Upanishad, where he says that that which is the knowerthe ground of all knowledgeis never itself an object of knowledge, just as fire doesnt burn itself. So theres always that profound mystery that you are never going to be in absolute control of what goes onbecause if you were, it would be like making love to a plastic woman. And who wants that? There always is the mystery. Nuh-uh; the thing we dont know. As van der Leeuw put it, the mystery of life is not a problem to be solved, but a reality to be experienced.  If there were not that, you see, there would be no life. The reason why certain people turn to philosophywhy I became a philosopherwas that, since I was a little boy, I always felt that existence as such was weird. I mean, here we areisnt that odd? Of course its odd. What do you mean by odd? Well, its whats different from even. I mean, whats odd stands out. Whats even lies flat. But you cant see the outstanding without the flat background. You know, heres this thing, standing out. Its odd. Each one of you is odd. Strange, unique, particular, different. How do we know what we mean by that, except against the background of something even that is not differentiated? Like space. And so you get this philosophical itch. You begin to scratch your head and think about why is that so?  Well, after a while you realize thats a meaningless question. And then you ask how is it so? Well that leads you into science and other investigations. So you want to know what is it? I mean this happening, this thing called existence. What is it You ask that question long enough and it suddenly hits you that if you could answer it, you wouldnt know what terms to put the answer in.  I mean, when we investigate the properties of nature, and we do get some answers, all the answers are in terms of particular structures, forms, patterns. And these can be measured, and their behavior can be predicted. But when I want to ask the question what are the forms made of; I mean, what is it really?we cant think of any way in which we could answer the question. Because we would have to have a class of all classes. When you ask the question what?its like saying is you is or is you aint? Is you animal? Is you vegetable? Is you mineral? Are you a Republican or a Democrat? Are you male or female? Are you a Christian, or a Jew, or a Hindu, or what have you? We classify, always, to give an answer to the question what is it? And when you classify, you distinguish an inside group from an outside group.  Alright, so what we want to know is, what is the group of all groups? Well, we cant imagine what the outside would be. So we cant answer the question what is it? So the physicist finally abandoned the quest for stuff. And they gave us a description of the universe entirely in terms of form. The pattern, not the stuff. When people ask, whats theyeah, but you cant do that! Whats the pattern made of Surelymustnt there be an answer to that?  See, what happens is, when you turn up the microscope, all stuff turns into form. It becomes articulateyou know, the carpet looks like some sort of stuff. But when you look at it under a microscope you will see the crystalline structure of the nylon, or whatever its made of. See? They want to know what are those crystals made of? Alright, turn up the volume! And you will find molecules. Turn up the volume! You find wavicles. But the wavicles must be of something! But, of course, theyre not. We find substance, or stuff, totally vanishes, and were left with form. Sanskrit doesnt really have a word for matter. It has nmarpa (), which means named, form. Its the form that matters. Or, lets put it in another way: everything is a matter of form. [Laughs] Now lets go into this; its fascinating.  We say does it matter? What does that mean? Does it matter? Is it important? In other words, does it measure up to anything? Alright, lets go back to the Indo-European roots of the language. Matter comes from a Sanskrit root, mt (), which means to measure. To lay out the foundation, say, for a building. So from this root mt we get, going on into Sanskrit, we get my (). And my is generally translated illusion, although it also means magic, creative power. The word illusionswitch overwe get that from Latin. And that comes from the Latin ludere, to play. Lets pretend that we matter. And so, also from the root mt, you see, you get meterthat is also to measure. You get mtr () in Greek, mater in Latin, which means mama, mother. The mother of Buddha was called my. Marym againwas the mother of Jesus. M, m, m, m, m. But m, you see, is a matter of form; pattern.  The Chinese called the basic principle of nature l (), and the character for l means the markings in jade. The fiber in muscle. The grain in wood. So, Joseph Needham translates it organic pattern. Thats whats going on, and there isnt any stuff involved. What stuff is, is a pattern seen out of focus, where it becomes fuzzy. Like kapok, see? We say kapok is the stuffing of a cushion, and thats stuff. Its, you know, some kind of goop. But when we examine the kapok closely we find structure. And thats what you will find, and there never will be anything else. Crazy. Because it completely flouts our common sense.  We say but surelyand philosophers beat tables that are in front of themand, you know, they say it is there! Because BANG, you know? There must be something that is stuff, that is substantial. But the only reason why you cant pass your hand through a table is [because] the table is moving too fast. [Chuckles] Its like trying to put your finger through an electric fan, only its going much faster than an electric fan. Anything solid is going so fast that theres no way to get this through it. Thats all. So we say, What is it that is going so fast? Well, that question is based on a grammatical illusion. The grammatical illusion is that all verbs have to have subjects. Can you imagine anything more weird than the idea that a verb, or an action, or an event, must be set into motion by a noun? That is to say, a non-event, or thing. Now whats the difference between a thing and an event? I cant, for the life of me, tell.  We say this is a fist. Thats a noun. What happens to it when I open my hand? This thing has unaccountably disappeared. So I should have called it a fisting. And this is a handing. It may also be a pointing. So we could devise a language, such as that of the Nootka Indians, where there are no nouns, there are only verbs. Chinese is very close to that. I think the superimposition of noun and verb on the Chinese language is a western invention. I cant think of any Chinese word for a noun. But all those languages of Indo-European origin have nouns and verbs in them, they have agents and operations. And thats one of the basic snags. When we divide the world into operations and agents, doers and doings, then we ask such silly questions as, Who knows? Who does it? What does it? When the what that is supposed to do it is the same as the doing! And you could very easily see that the whole process of the universe may be understood as process. Nobodys doing it. Because when you go back to doing it, you go back to the military analogy; the chain of command. The boss who goes bang, and the object obeys. Its a very crude idea, and very unsophisticated.  So, if you can bear it, we have suddenly eliminated a spook. And the spook was called stuff. So were now more at ease with ourselves in a world of form. Nmarpa; named forms. We can, of course, get rid of the names. We can go further and try the experiment of not calling the forms by any names. Just observing the forms; although, when weve gotten rid of the names we cant even call them formsbecause thats a name. And theres the bizazz going on, which Buddhists call tatht (). And that means suchness, or thusness. Actually, tatht is da-da-da. Because when a baby first talks it says da. Da! Da! Da! Da! And fathers flatter themselves that its saying da-da, daddy. It isnt. Its saying da! And so the Upanishads say tat tvam asi (  ): youre it. The basic da. Because da doesnt mean anything. Da is like everything else, see? The world is a musical phenomenon. Good music never refers to anything except the music itself. You dont ask Mr. Bach or Mr. Ravi Shankar what do you mean by this music? What is it intended to express? Bad music always expresses something other than itself, like the 1812 Overture, or the Sunken Cathedral. Good music never talks about anything other than the music. If you ask Bach what is your meaning?hell say, listen. Thats the meaning. Giraffes are giraffing, trees are treeing, stars are starring, clouds are clouding, rain is raining. And if you dont understand, look at it again. And people are peopling. Wow!   I   Escaping the Tangle  The function of a Zen teacher is to put his students in all kinds of situations where, in the normal course of social relations, they would get stuck. By asking nonsensical questions, by making absurd remarks, by always unhinging things, and above all, keeping them stirred up with impossible demands: to hear the sound of one hand, towithout movingstop a ship sailing out to the water, or to stop the sound of a train whistle in the distance. Magic. To touch the ceiling without getting up from ones chair, to take the four divisions of Tokyo out of your sleeve, to take Mount Fuji out of a pillbox; all these impossible questions are asked, and in the ordinary way of interpreting these questions we think, Well, nowgee, how could we do that? See? Thats a very difficult question thats been asked. And you have to think, What would I do to do that?  Because we are caught up in a certain way of discourse which the language-game that we playand the social games, the production games, and the survival games that we playare good games. But we take them so seriously that we think that that is the only important thing. And this is to unstick us from that notion and realize that it would be just as good a game to drop dead now as to go on living.   Is a lightning flash bad because it lives for a second, as compared with the sun that goes on for billions of years? You cant make that sort of comparison, because a world of lighting goes also with a world where theres a sunand vice versa. So, long-lived creatures and short-lived go together; thats the meaning of that saying: Flowering branches grow naturally. Some short, some long.  So this, then, is a scene in a Zen community where spontaneous behavior is encouraged within certain limits. And as the student becomes more and more used to it, those limits are expanded. Until, eventually, he can be trusted to go out on the street and behave like a true Zen character, and get by perfectly well. You know what occasionally happens on the street when two people are walking down the sidewalk straight at each other, and they both decide to move to the right together and then to the left together, and they somehow get stuck and they cant pass each other. Zen teachers will pull just exactly that sort of stunt, when going down a path, and meet one of their studentsto see if they can get him in a tangle, and can he escape from it? And you will find, in everyday life, that there is a very clear distinction between people who always seem to be self-possessed, and people who are dithering and nervous and dont quite know how to react in any given situation; always getting embarrassed because they have their life too strongly programmed. You saidI mean, this is a common marriage argumentYou said you would do such-and-such a thing at such-and-such a time! And now youve changed your plans! Not that the change of plans really caused any inconvenience, but just the feeling that when you say you will do something at a certain time, you ought to do it at that time come hell or high water! Well, thats being very unadaptable. Thats being a stonekind of stickything. If it, after all, doesnt matter when we do it and somebody is offended because the time has been changed, thats simply because they are attached to punctuality as a fetish. And this is one of the great problems. This causes many automobile accidents. Men rushing home to be on time for dinner, when they stayed late either working, or they had to stop for a drink at some bar, or when a girl feels that she has a fussy husband and she feels she has to have the dinner ready at exactly a certain moment, she ruins the cooking. Hed rather have a faithful wife and a bad cook. I hope Im not treading on any toes. So, you see, we spend an awful lot of energy trying to make our lives fit images of what life is or should be which they could never possibly fit. So Zen practice is in getting rid of these images. But its so explosive, socially, to do that, and it so worries people they get vertigo, they get dizzy, they dont know which end is up. And this happens, you know, if youve ever been in one of those Blab-Lab sessions, where they call them tea groupsI think, or something like thatwhere people gather together without any clear idea of what this gathering is about. They know its somehow self-exploration, but just how do you begin on that? And so, somebody starts to push his idea, and then somebody else says, Well, why are you trying to push your idea on us? And then they all get into an argument about the argument, and the most amazing confusions come aboutbut sometimes they all see what idiots theyre being, and then they learn to live together in a really open and spontaneous way. There was a very interesting dinner party once where a Zen master was present, and there was a geisha girl who served so beautifully and had such style that he suspected she must have some Zen training. And after a while, when she pours to fill his sake cup, he bowed to her and said, Id like to give you a present. And she said, I would be most honored. And he took the iron chopsticks that are used for the hibachithe charcol brazier; moving the charcoal aroundhe picked up a piece of red-hot charcoal and gave it to her. Well, she instantlyshe had very long sleeves on her kimonoshe whirled the sleeves around her hands and took the hot charcoal, withdrew to the kitchen, dumped it, and changed her kimono because it was burnt through. Then she came back into the room, and after a suitable interval she stopped before the Zen master and bowed to him and said, I would like to give you, sir, a present. And he said, I would be very much honored. Of course, he was wearing a kimono, or something like this. And so she picked up a piece of coal and offered it to him. He immediately produced a cigarette and said, Thank you, thats just what I needed.  Now, you know, in the same way that we have this in our culture: certain people who are comedians, who know how to make jokes and gags in a completely unprepared situation. Face them with anything and they somehow come through. So that is exactly the same thing in a special domain as Zen. Only, a master of Zen does this in every life situation. But the important thing is to be able to do thisthis is the secretyou must remember: you cant make a mistake. Now, thats a very difficult thing to do, because from childhood up we have had to conform to a certain social game. And if you are going to conform to this game you can make mistakes or not make mistakes. And so this thing has gone into us all the time. You must do the right thing! Theres certain conduct appropriate here. Theres certain conduct appropriate there. And that sticks in us and gives us a double-self all our lives long, because we never grow up. Do you realize that the whole of life plays a game, which is a childhood game? There are three kinds of people: top people, middle people, and bottom people. And there cant be any middle people unless there are bottom people and top people. And there cant be any top people unless there are middle and bottom people, and so it goes. And everybody is trying to be in a top set. Well, if they are going to be there theres gotta be people in the bottom set. And there are people who do the right thing and people who do the wrong thing. Here in Sausalitowe have this very, very plainlythere are the right people, the nice people who live up on the hill. Then there are the nasty people who live down here on the waterfront, and they grow beards and they wear blue jeans and they smoke marijuana. And whereas the other people on the top of the hill drive Cadillacs, and have wall-to-wall carpeting, and nicely mowed lawns, and their particular kind of poison is alcohol. Now, the people who live on the top of the hill know that they are nice people, but they wouldnt know they were nice people unless they had some nasty people to compare themselves with. Every in-group requires an out-group. Whereas the nasty people think they are the real far-out people, whereas those people, those hillbillies, are squares. And they wouldnt be able to feel far-out unless there were squares. See? These things simply go together. But when that is not seen we play the games of getting on top of things all the time, and so we are in a constant state of competition. As toif its not Im stronger than you, its Im wiser than you, Im more loving than you, Im more tolerant than you, Im more sophisticated than you. It doesnt matter what it is, but this constant competition is going on. In terms of that competition we can, of course, lose place andin that sensemake mistakes. But what a Zen student is, is a person who is not involved in the status game. Thats the real meaning of a monk. He is not keeping up with the Jones, and to be a master he must get to the point where hes not trying to be a master. The whole idea of your being better than anybody else simply doesnt make any sense at all; it is totally meaningless. Because, you see, everybody manifesting the marvel of the universe in the same way as the stars do, and the water, and the winds, and the animals. And you see them all as being in their right places and not being able, really, to make mistakesalthough they may think they are making mistakes or not making mistakes, and playing all these competitive games. But thats their game! Now, I only say if that game begins to bore you, and it begins to trouble you and give you ulcers and all kinds of things, then you raise the problem of getting out of it, and therefore you start to become interested in things like Zen. That is simply a symptom of your growing in a certain direction where you are tired of playing a certain kind of game. You are as naturally flowing in another direction as if a tree were putting out a new branch. So because you say, Oh well, we people are interested in higher thingsyou see, that depends, still, on the differentiation of rank between the superior and the inferior people. But when you begin to see through that and grow out of that, you dont think any more of this superior and inferior classification. You dont think, We are spiritual people who attend to higher things as distinct from these morons who are only interested in beer and television. This is simply our particular form of life. Like there are crabs, and there are spiders, and there are sharks, and there are sparrows, and so on.    II   The In Defines the Out Defines the In  The trouble with the human being is like the trouble with certain animals. Like the dinosaur, who evolved to the point where he was so big that hed have to have two brainsa higher self in the head and a lower self in the rump. And the difficulty was to get these two brains coordinated. But we have exactly the same trouble, and we are suffering from a kind of jitters that comes from being two-brained. Now, you see, Im not saying that that jitters is badits a potential step in evolution and an opportunity of growth. But remember, in the process of growth, the oak is not better than the acorn; because what does it do? It produces acorns. Or you could sayjust like I sometimes love to saythat a chicken is one eggs way of becoming others. So an oak is an acorns way of becoming other acorns. Where is the point of superiority? The first verse of the poem I just quotedThe flowering branches grow naturally. Some short, some longthe first verse is,  So thats the point of view of being an outcast, in the sense of being outside the taking seriously of being involved in the social game, and therefore being threatened by making mistakes, of doing the wrong thingthat is to say, of carrying into adult life ones childhood conditioning where somebody is constantly yammering at you to play the game. So therefore, the preachers and the teachers take the same attitude towards their adult congregations that parents take to children, and lecture them and tell them what they should do. And judges in courts feel also entitled to give people lectures because they say those criminal-types havent grown upbut neither have the judges. It takes two to make a quarrel. So one can begin to think in a new wayin polarity-thinking. Instead of being stuck with the competitive thinking of the good guys and the bad guys, the cops and robbers, the capitalists and the communists, all these things which are simply childishness. Now, of course, you recognize that the moment I say that its like talking in English in order to show that the English language has limitations. And I am talking in a language that seems competitive to show that the competitive game has limitations. As if I were saying to all you cats here, Look, I have something to tell you. And if you get this, you will be in a better position than you were before you heard it. But I cannot speak to this groupor to society, or this language-speaking culturewithout using the language, the gestures, the customs, et cetera, that you have. The Zen masters try to get around this by doing thingssuddenlythat people just dont get. Well, what is this? Therefore, that is the reason whythis is the real reason whyZen cannot be explained. You have to make, as it were, a jump from the valuation game of better people and worse people, in-groups and out-groups, and you can only make it by seeing that they all are mutually interdependent. So if we take this situationlets say I would be talking to you and saying, Look, I have some very special thing that youve got to take notice of. Therefore I am the in-group, and Im the teacher and you are the out-group. I know perfectly well that I cannot be the teacher unless you come here, and so that my status and my position is totally dependent on you. It isnt something, you see, therefore I have first and then you get. These things arise mutually. So if you wouldnt come, I wouldnt talk. I wouldnt know what to say, because I borrowed your language. So that is the insight: that things go together. Then, when you see thatand arent in competitionthen you dont make a mistake. Because you dont dither. When I first learned the piano and played these wretched scales, the teacher beside me had a pencil in her hand and she hit my fingers every time I made a wrong note. The consequence was, I never learned to read music because I hesitated too long to play the note on time. Because I was always, Is this pencil going to land? See? And that gets built into your psyche. And so, people are alwaysalthough they are adults, and nobody is clubbing them around and screaming at them any longerathey hear the echoes of that screaming mamaor that bombinating papain the back of their heads all their life long. And so they adopt the same attitudes to their own children, and the farce continues. Because there is noI mean, I dont say that you shouldnt lay down the law to children if you want them to play the social game. But if you lay down the law to your children, you must make provisions later in life for them to be liberated. To go through a process of curing them from the bad effects of education. But you cant do that unless you, too, grow up, you see? As we grow up. Says I, including myself. So that is the thing. Now, therefore, in the Zen scene, you would think that the master as we know him and we read about him is an extremely authoritative figure. Thats the way he deliberately comes on at the beginning. He puts up a terrific show of being an awful dragon. And this screens out all sorts of people who dont have, somehow, the nerve to get into the work. But once you are in, a very strange change takes place: the master becomes the brother; he becomes the affectionate helper of all those students, and they love him as they would a brother, rather than respect him as they would a father. And therefore, the students and masters, they make jokes about each other; they have a very curious kind of social relationship which has all of the outward trappings of authoritarian, but everybody knows on the inside that thats a joke. Liberated people have to be very cool. Otherwise, in a society which doesnt believe in equality and cannot possibly practice it, they would be considered extremely subversive. And therefore, great Zen masters wear purple and gold and carry scepters and sit in thrones, and all this is carried on to cool it. The outside world knows, Theyre alright, they have discipline, they have order, they are perfectly fine.   III   The Japanese Zen Monastery  Having discussed basic principles of what Zen is about, Im passing on to the more practical side of it. A Zen monastery is not a monastery in the Christian sense. Its more like a theological seminary, except that it practices more than it teaches. A typical institution consists of a campus, and on the campus there are many buildings. First of all, around the edges, you will invariably find independent temples that were founded in times past by noble families, because one of the things that Buddhists did when they came to the Far East was they exploited ancestor worship. This was very clever of them: this being the great religion of China, the Buddhist priests performed services like [?] masses for the repose of the souls, or for good incarnationreincarnationsfor ones ancestors, and they made quite a thing out of that. And so they have memorial services for the departed, and thats one of the principal functions of temples in Japan. People dont go to temple in the same way as Westerners go to church. They make pilgrimages to temples andsay, at a great temple like Eihei-jiyou will find, on a Sunday morningor practically any morninga swarm of about 500 people attending the 4 a.m. service of chanting. Chanting the Buddhist scriptures. But they are, kind of, in and out of their temples. They have special services, they have memorial services, weddings, funerals, or everything like that, but they dont have a parish kind of church community as we find it in the West. Although, when Buddhismthrough the Japanese immigrantsexports itself to the United States, they immediately copy the Protestant church institution and sing, Buddha loves me, this I know, for the stra tells me so. Its terrible. And all the young mennisei, who have never been in Japanthe one thing they cant stand is stra chanting, because they dont know what it means, and the priests dont know what it means a lot of the time. And sobut its beautiful to listen to, and they havent got an educated Western ear yet to appreciate that kind of oriental music. Well, now, aside from these many temples, each of which is in charge of a priest with his familyand some of them are having a hard time making a go of it these days, so they become restaurants for very elegant food, or museums, and all sorts of things. Now, the centralthe guts of the Zen temple is whats called the sd. S, in Japanse, is the sagha, the order of followers of the Buddha; d simply means hall. So the sagha hall, or sd, is the center. And this consists of a number of rooms, but the main onethe actual sd itselfis a large, long, spacious room, with platforms on either side and a wide passage down the center. The platforms are six feet wide and each contains a number of tatami mats, which are measured six by three, and every monk is assigned to a mat. And on a shelf behind the mat, against the wall, he has all his posessions, which are very simple. And so the mat is his sleeping place and his meditation place. There is an image of the bodhisattva Manjushri in the hall, more or less in the center of the passage between the platforms. Manjushri is a bodhisattvacalled a monju in Japanwho holds in his hand a sword, and this sword is the sword of wisdom, or praj, which cuts asunder all illusions. That is the dwelling place and the meditation place of the monks, and then they have, of course, kitchens, and a library, and they have special temples that the monks use for various services. Then, aside from that, there are the quarters of the kansho, who is the abbot, or administrative head, of the temple, and then the quarters of the rshi, who is the spiritual teacher. There isnt, in the Zennot in the Rinzai Zen School, at any rateexactly a hierarchy. Every temple is independent. Theres no Pope, no Archbishop, but there is a fraternal relationship between all the temples of the Rinzai sect. The St sect have a little bit of a hierarchy, but still, on the whole, the kanshoor administrative head of the templeis the big boss. The rshi is the respected boss, the man everybodys terrified ofat least on the outside, at any rate. Now, if you want to get into one of these institutions and study, they make it difficult. Its so different from the welcome attitude you get when you go into a Christian church. Here, they repel you. Westerners, of course, are treated with a certain amount of courtesy that is not ordinarily accorded to Japanesebut even then its made difficult, because they realize that a Westerner whos taken the trouble to learn Japanese, and to get himself over the oceans, and to live under unfamiliar conditions is certainly pretty serious about it. And there are a number of Western Zen monks. So funnytheres one at Taihei-ji, who comes from San Francisco, and hes tremendously tall, and to see him with all the others is quite amusing. Anyway, the formal approach is that you arrive in your traveling gear at the gate, and the Zen monks traveling gear is most picturesque: he wears a great mushroom on his head; enormous straw hat, about so wide, and then he has a black robeshorter than a kimonoand he has long white tabi socks underneath, and geta, which are the wooden sandals with bridges on them to keep you high up a bit. Or he may wear just plain waraji, which are straw sandals. Then he carries, on the front, his little box in which are his eating bowls, his razor, his toothbrush, and such necessities of life. When he arrives hes told that the monastery is very poor and they cant afford to take on any more students, and that the teacher is getting old and it might tax his strength, and things like that. So he has to sit on the steps, and he puts his traveling box in front of him, he takes off his big hat, and he lays his head on the boxhis foreheadand waits there all day. But he is invited in for meals to a special little guest house, because no traveling monk can be refused hospitality. And he is admitted at night into this special place, but hes expected not to sleep, but to spend all night in meditation. In olden times this went on for at least a week or ten days to test this fellow out. Then, finally, the assistant to the rshi comes and tells him that the rshi maybe will have a talk with him  IV   Entering the Temple  So, you must remember the aspect of a rshi to this young monk: hes a formidable fellow; usually an older man who has about him something that is difficult to put your finger on. Theres a certain fierceness coupled with a kind of tremendous directness, a sense of somebody who sees right through you. And so he really poses to this young fellow, What do you want? Why did you come here?  But he said, I came to be instructed in Zen.  And the teacher says, Well, we dont teach anything here. There isnt anything in Zen to study.  Well, the student knowsor thinks he knowsthat this not anything, which is studied in Zen, is the real thing; thatsof course, as a Buddhist, he knowsthat what isnt anything is the universe, the great void, the nyat. And so he isnt phased by that. He says, Well, nevertheless, you do have people who are working here and meditating under your instruction, and Id like to join them.  Well, maybe. But strictly on probation.  And then, of course, all the details are taken and he pays a ridiculously small feein modern Japan, at any rateto be able to stay in the monastery. Its very, very inexpensive. Now the teacher comes back and says, Now, you want to study Zen. Why?  Well, because Im oppressed by the rounds of birth and deathin other words, by the vicious circles of life in which I find myselfby suffering, by pain, and so on, and I want to be emancipated.  The teacher says, Who is it that wants to be emancipated?  Thats a stopper. There was a good old story about one of these preliminary interviews. The master asks, first of all, very casual questions. Where is your hometown? Whats your name? What did your father do?And where did you go to college? Why is my hand so much like the Buddhas hand? And suddenly, you know, in mid-stream of an ordinary conversationclunk!the student is blocked. And so there is devised the kanin Chinese: gngnand this means, literally, the word kan means a case, in exactly the same sense as we talk about a case in law which functions as a precedent for future cases. Kan should be translated case. The kans are based on stories, mond, of the conversations between the old masters and their students. But you can make a kan immediately by such a question, Why is my hand so much like the Buddhas hand? Or, Who are you that asked this question? If the student tries to verbalize on that and say, Well, I am so-and-so, he asks, Who knows that you are so-and-so? How do you know that you know? Who knows that you know? Find out! In other words, the basic kan is always Who are you? Who is it that wants to escape from birth and death? And I wont take words for an answer. I want to see you! And all youre showing me at the moment is your mask.  So, then the student is sent back to the monks quarters, the sd, and the chief of the sd iscalled the jikijitsuis then put in charge of him, and he teaches him how to behave, what the rules are, how to eat, and how to meditate. In the Zen sect they sit on [a] padded cushion about the thickness of the San Francisco telephone directorywhich is an admirable substitute. And then, with crossed legs in the lotus posturewith the feet resting on the thighs, like you always see a Buddhathey sit for half-hour periods. Thats supposed to be the length of time it takes for a stick of incense to burn. And then, when wooden clappers are knocked together, they all get up and they walk round and round the roomquite fast, kind of a slam, slam, slam, slam, slam, slam, slam, slam, slam, slam paceand this keeps you awake. Then, at a given signal, they go back and meditate again. And, constantly, there is a monk, one on each side, carries a long, flat stick shaped almost like this fanin the sense that its thin at one end and rounded at the otherand if this guy sees a monk whos slouching, or sleeping, or goofing off in some way he very respectfully bows before him. And the monk rests his head on his knees, and this fellow takes the stick and hits him vigorously on the shoulders, here, like this. Now, most apologists for Zen say this is not punishment, its simply to keep you awake. Dont you believe it. Ive investigated this, and its the same as the British boysschoolonly it doesnt have the erotic qualities that the British floggings do. Zen people are cool about it. But it is a kind of a fierce thing. Anyway, the point of the meditation, the zazen, is thatperhaps at the beginningone does nothing more than count your breathingso many breaths in, counting in tensjust to allow your thoughts to become still. Zen people do not close their eyes when they meditate, nor do they close their ears. They keep their eyes on the floor in front of them, and they dont try to force away any sounds that are going on, or any smell, or any sensation whatever. Only, they dont think about it. And this can become an extraordinarily pleasant occupation. All the little sounds of distant traffic, of birds, of somebody carpentering somewhere and the hammer going, dog barking, orespeciallyrain on the roof; gorgeous. They dont block that out. But as time goes on, instead of counting breathing they devote themself to the kan problem which the rshi has assigned. What is the sound of one hand? Who were you before your father and mother conceived you? When Jsh was asked, Does a dog have Buddha nature? he replied, No. What is the meaning of no, or mu? All sorts of these problems.  V   Answering the Kan  And so, as time goes on, everyday the student goes to the teacher for what is called sanzen. Sanzen means studying Zen. And he has to present a satisfactory answer to the kan. Now, sanzen is the moment in the monastery when no holds are barred, although theres a very formal approach to it. The monk has to stop outside the masters quarters and make this mokugyo. He does that three times. And at a signal from the master, which is ringing a bell in reply, he goes in and sits down in front of the master, and bows right down to the floor, and then sits up, and he repeats the kan that hes been given. And hes supposed to answer it. Now, the master, if hes not satisfied with the answer, may simply ring his bell, which means: interview over, nothing doing. Or, if hes still not satisfied, he may try to do something to hint the student as to which way to go, or puzzle him further; some sort of comment. But what happens is thisdo you see what kind of a situation has been set up here?the student is really being asked to be absolutely genuine. If I said to you, Now, dont be self-conscious. I want you to be perfectly sincere. And, as a matter of fact, Im a mindreader, and I know whether youre being sincere or not. I can see right down to that last little wiggly guzzle in the back of your mind. And if you think I can, you see, Im putting you in a double bind. Im commanding you to be genuine. How can you possibly do that on command? Especially when the person youre confronted with is a father figure, an authority figure. And in Japan, the senseithe teacheris even a more authoritative figure than ones father, which is saying a lot. But you are being asked, in the presence of this tiger, to be completely spontaneous. Orit isnt put in that way, you see, though. I mean, Im describing this from the standpoint of a psychologist observing whats going on here. No, the thing youve got to do is youve got to hear the sound of one hand. And as your answers become more and more rejected, you get more and more desperate. And there is built up the state that is called the great doubt. The students do everything, you know? They read all the old Zen stories, and they come in with pieces of rock and wood, and they try and hit the teacher, they do everythingand nothing, nothing will do. I remember I had a friend studying in Kyto, and on the way to the masters quarters you pass through a lovely garden with a pool. And he saw a bullfrog in the garden. And he grabbed this bullfrogtheyre very tame in Japanput it in his sleeve in his kimono, and when he got in to give an answer to his kan he produced the bullfrog. And the master shook his head and said, Nu-uh. Too intellectual. Of course, he meant not so much what we mean by intellectual, but too contrived, too pre-meditated. You know, youre just copying other peoples Zen antics, and thats something you just cant get away with. Well, there does come a critical point of total desperation. And when the student reaches that point the teacher really starts encouraging him. He says, Now, come on. Youre getting warm. But you must be ready to die for this. You muststudents have even been put into the position that if they dont get it in so many days, theyre going to commit suicide. And they have to stimulate this intense perioda thing called sesshin. Dont confuse the word sesshin with the English session. Sesshin means studying or observation of the shinthe heart, the mind. The heart-mind. And this time they only sleep four hours a night. And they meditate solidly all through the day. They go for the sanzen interview twice a dayevery one of themand its a tremendous workout, and will last about five days. Five or six days. And in that period the pressure is really on. Everybody is worked into a pitch of, kind of, psychic fury; they have to get this thing answered. Theres a man in Japan today who has a five-day Zen system, and he practically guarantees that you have satori in his five days. I just got a book about it, written by a BritishI havent had a chance to read it yet. Well, I had asomeone I knew ofwho was over, studying Zen on a fulbright grant, and the grant was winding up and he still hadnt got the sound of one hand. He said to the master, Look, my grants running out and I cant stay here, and Ive just got to get this thing. So, just a day before he left, he suddenly realized that there was nothing to realize. And that was it. You know, here he had spent his whole life thinking that theres something deficient in me. See? Theres something wrong. Something I ought to find out to get this problem of life cleaned up. Well, you know what you do. Rinzai, the old Chinese master, said, Zen teaching is like using an empty fist to deceive a child. Or like trying to stop a child crying by giving it a yellow leaf. See, the child wants gold, and so you give it an autumn leaf and say, Here, darling. Theres some gold. Be alright. Or, with your closed fist you say, What have I got here? The child comes and tries to see and pull your fingers open. Then you hide it behind your back, and under your leg, and behind the chair; child gets absolutely fascinated. The longer you keep this up, the more the child is sure there is some real goodie inside the hand, and then at the endpshnothing. And thats Zen.  VI   Seeing Past the Illusion  So there comes a time, you see, when the student can go in front of the master and not give a damn. Because he seeshes seen the point. There wasnt a problem. He made up the problem himself. He came and projected it on this master, who knew how to handle that kind of person by making him much more stupid than he was beforeuntil he sees the essential stupidity of the human situation where we are playing a game of one-upmanship on other people and on the universe. How to get the better of life? Well, what makes you think youre separate from life so that you can get the better of it? How can you beat the game? What game? Or, who will beat it? This illusion of beating the game, of finding the thing out, of catching it by the tail, is therefore dissipated by the technique of the kan. Its calledworking on a kan is like a mosquito biting an iron bull. Its the nature of the mosquito to bite. Its the nature of an iron bull to be unbitten. Or they say its like swallowing a ball of molten lead. You cant swallow it down, you cant cough it up; you cant get rid of this thing. Thats the great doubt, you see? But this is an exaggerated form of what everybody is ordinarily trying to do: to beat the game. So, at that moment the student has heard the sound of one hand, or discovered who he was before father and mother conceived him, or what no means. So the teacher says, Good. Now you have found the frontier gate to Zen. Youve put your foot in at the door and youre across the threshold. But theres a long way to go! And now you have found this priceless thing out, you must redouble your efforts. So he gives him another kan. Now, the student may be able to answer that one instantly, because its simply a test kan. See, there are five classes of kans. The first class is what you call the hnayna kans, and the other four are the mahyna kans. Hnayna is to reach Nirva. Mahyna is to come back and bring Nirva into the world as a bodhisattva. So once you get the Great Void, you see theres nothing to catch on toyou are the universe, it doesnt matter whether you live or diethats Nirva. All clinging to lifeeverything like thatyou see, then, that its hopeless and you give it up. Not because you think you ought to give it up; because you know there is no way of catching it. Theres nothing to catch hold of. Theres no safety in the cosmos. So you just have to give up. Then, the next class of kans are such things as asking for miracles. In that class comes, Take the four divisions of Tokyo out of your sleeve. Or, Stop the booming of a distant bell. Blow out a candle in Timbuktu. But as they go on in various ways they are concerned with all kinds of problems, and how Zen understanding deals with those problems. Until we get, in the end, to the study of morality and rules of social and monastic life. Thats the last thing, and the Zen way of understanding it. Now, this maythis takes very, very differing periods of time. Some people get through in as little as ten years; the whole thing. There is a very brilliant Westerner by the name of Walter Nowick, who has just about completed the whole thing. And hes a musician and pianist, and hell come back to this country as the first accredited Zen master of the West. And hell set up his little sd on a farm, and wait and see what happens. The day of graduation comes, and then everybody turns out, and theres a great hullabaloo, and they salute the departing monk, and he goes out. He may just become a layman, as I said, or become a temple priest, or he may be, himself, a rshi.  VII   The Decline Of Modern Temples  Well, now, the essential of this whole system, as you see, is to use a hair of the dog that bit you for the cure of the bite. Its homeopathic. When people are under delusion they cannot be talked out of the delusion. No amount of talk could persuade anybody that his ego is an illusion, because he knows its there. He knows I am I, and simply wont believe you if you tell him that this is nothing but posthypnotic suggestion. So the only way to convince a fool of his folly is to make him persist in it. As Blake says, The fool who persists in his folly will become wise. Why, some psychiatrists I knowI know when they get a person who over-eats and is tremendously fat, the first thing they do is they make them put on fifteen more pounds. And get an alcoholic terribly drunk, oh, and sick, and just as awful as can be, you see? Really make him go at it, see? Thats a method thats used. Sometimes works, sometimes doesnt; its a rather desperate method, rather dangerous method. Zen is dangerous, too. People could easily go crazy under this sort of strain without a good advisor. Well, it is clear, of course, that this method of Zen training is most unsuited to the modern age. And this is witnessed, too, by the fact that the temples are relatively empty. Myshin-ji, the biggest one in Kyto, is built to house 600 monks. There are only 80. And you might think that was quite a crowd, but it isntcompared with the old days. To young people in Japan today this is all incomprehensible. They see no point in it. A fewa few, yes, but they are mostly clergys sons carrying out the family tradition, and thats very bad indeed. To be sent to a monastery, virtually. The only possible success can come for someone who goes because he feels that nothing else in the world will satisfy him. He just has to do it. And so the traditions, as in all these ancient organizations, have become very fixed. A lot of it is meaningless. It is certainly not going to last; not in that form. Its falling apart right under our eyes. Its old and its set in its ways. Also, since the time of Hakuin, the kans have been given fixed answers. That is to say, there is a sort of prescribed way in which to answer, and youve got to hit on the right one. And then, after youve answered it, you have to find a poem from a little book called the Zenrin-kush, which means the Zen Forest Anthology. And there are little couplets, and youve got to find one which represents the meaning of your kan. I mean, you know, Take the four divisions of Tokyo out of your sleeve, nothing could be simpler. But some monk has recently threatened to publish all the answers to the kans, so that the masters would have to get on their toes and invent new ones. I know a rshi who invents new ones, and the moment they open their mouths he stops them, No! No, no, nope! Too late! You know, he saysyou could ask Christians, Whats the first word in the Bible? And things like that. It becomes much more lively, you see, when there is this quick interchange of the teacher and the students. Butin modern idiomwho the devil wants to know about Joshus mu anymore, or some ancient fellows questions? Couched in language, incidentallythis is part of the problems they havethe language of these kans is very archaic. I mean, What is the sound of one hand? Well, theres a Chinese proverb which says, One hand wont make a clap. So if you dont know that proverbif thats a proverb thats in everyday use and I say to you, What is the sound of one hand? then it has some sense. But there are all kinds of, shall I say, referencesallusionsin the old stories, and they therefore dont necessarily fit our world, or the Japanese world of date. You have to take the kans out of everyday life; things that are going on now, you see? Its like askingwhats that man who advertises Schweppes, commander... WhiteheadWhy has commander Whitehead no beard?   VIII   The Truth of Birthless Mind  There was, thoughyou seethere was a division in the history of Zen. There was a critical point in the 17th century when there were two very great masters: Hakuin and Bankei. Now, the 17th century is tremendously important in Japanese history because that was a time of what you might call the democratization of culture. Bash invented haiku poetry so that everyone could be a poet. Not necessarily for publication, but for ones own fun. People didnt write poems for publication, necessarilythey wrote poems for parties. And he invented the 17-syllable haiku as a result of his Zen feeling for nature so that he could put this within the reach of everybody. What had happened to poetry before that time was that it had become so obscure, and so effete, and so sophisticated that only great literati could do it at all. This happened to Chinese poetry; there were so many references to other poems it was like reading T. S. Eliot. You know, the Four Quartets. You could get an annotated Four Quartets showing you the sources of all the phrases hes borrowed, and sometimes you have to know the source in order to see what he means by it. Alright, thats straight from the Revelations of Divine Love by the dame Julian of Norwich, but whoever would know that? You have to understand the scene she was digging in order to know, really, what Eliots getting at in that All shall be well. And hes full of that. He quotes the Bhagavad Gita, he quotes everybody. So, if we all had to write that way, nobody could be a poet unless he was a great scholar. So Bash popularized the haiku, and the haiku are originally based on the Zenrin poems. They take their flavor from that. There is one, you see: Those bird calls, mountain changes to be more mysterious. The first line of that says, The wind drops, but the flowers keep on falling. The bird calls, and the mountain becomes more mysterious. And so haiku developed from that kind of short insight, that glimpse of nature. Now, while Bash was taking poetry to the peasants, Bankei was taking Zen to them as wellto the farmers. And he ran his Zen on an entirely different system. He talked, mainly, about what he called fush. Fush is the unborn; that which has not yet arisen and which, as a matter of fact, never does arise. And so he said there is in you the unborn mind which was given to you by your parents. Let me just read you a few quotations from him to show you what sort of a person he was :  [from Zen: Poems, Prayers, Sermons, Anecdotes, Interviews]   The mind, begotten by and given to each of us by our parents, is none other than the Buddha-mind. Birthless and immaculate, sufficient to manage all that life throws upon us. A proof: suppose at this very instant, while you face me listening, a crow caws and a sparrow twitters somewhere behind you. Without any intention on your part to distinguish between these sounds, you hear each distinctly. In doing so you are hearing with the birthless mind, which is yours for all eternity.   Well, we are to be in this mind from now on, and our sect will be known as the Buddha-mind sect. To consider my example of a moment ago, once again, if any of you feel you heard the crow and the sparrow intentionally, you are deluding yourselves, for you are listening to me, not to what goes on behind you. In spite of this there are moments when you hear such sounds distinctly, when you hear with the Buddha-mind of non-birth. Nobody here can deny this. All of you are living Buddhas, because the birthless mind which each possesses is the beginning and the basis of all.   Now, if the Buddha-mind is birthless, it is necessarily immortal, for how can what has never been born perish? Youve all encountered the phrase birthless and imperishable in the strasnot born, not dyingbut hitherto youve not had the slightest proof of its truth. Indeed I suppose like most people youve memorized this phrase while being ignorant of the fact of birthlessness.   When I was twenty-five I realized that non-birth is all-sufficient to life, and since then, for forty years, Ive been proving it to people just like you. I was the first to preach this greatest truth of life. I ask, have any of you priests heard anybody else teach this truth before me? Of course not.   Verse 3   A priest said to him, Once in the Buddha-mind, I am absent-minded.   Bankei says, Well, suppose you are absent-minded as you say. If someone pricked you in the back with a gimlet, would you feel the pain?  Naturally!  Then you are not absent-minded. Feeling the pain, your mind would show itself to be alert.   Verse 7   A layman says, Though I undertake Zen discipline, I often find myself lazy, weary of the whole thing, unable to advance.   And he replies, Once in the Buddha-mind theres no need to advance, nor is it possible to recede. Once in birthlessness, to attempt to advance is to have receded from the state of non-birth. A man secure in that state need not bother himself with such things: hes above them.   Verse 9   The Buddha-mind in each of you is immaculate. All youve done is reflected in it, but if you bother about one such reflection, youre certain to go astray. Your thoughts dont lie deep enoughthey rise from the shallows of your mind.   Remember that all you see and hear is reflected in the Buddha-mind and influenced by what was previously seen and heard. Needless to say, thoughts arent entities. So if you permit them to rise, reflect themselves, or cease altogether as theyre prone to do, and if you dont worry about them, youll never go astray. In this way let one hundred, nay, one thousand thoughts arise, and its as if not one has arisen. You will remain undisturbed.   Verse 13   The only thing I tell my people is to stay in the Buddha-mind. There are no regulations, no formal discipline. Nevertheless they have agreed among themselves to sit in Zen for a period of two incense sticks daily. All right, let them. But they should well understand that the birthless Buddha-mind has absolutely nothing to do with sitting with an incense stick burning in front of you. If one keeps in the Buddha-mind without straying, theres no further satori to seek. Whether awake or asleep, one is a living Buddha. Zazen means only one thingsitting tranquilly in the Buddha-mind. But really, you know, ones everyday life, in its entirety, should be thought of as a kind of sitting in Zen.   Even during ones formal sitting, one may leave ones seat to attend to something. In my temple, at least, such things are allowed. Indeed its sometimes advisable to walk in Zen for one incense sticks burning, and sit in Zen for the other. A natural thing, after all. One cant sleep all day, so one rises. One cant talk all day, so one sits in Zen. There are no binding rules here.   Verse 16  And so thats what happened, you see? Bankei was the abbot of Myshin-jithe rshiand he stopped the monks from using the kaiseki stick to hit them when they werent meditating or sleeping in meditation, because he said, Even a sleeping man is still a Buddha, and you shouldnt be disrespectful. And he attempted a Zen of no methods. You can meditate if you want to, thats fine. But thats like polishing a brick to make a mirror. And he used to say, too, that trying to purify your mind is like trying to wash off blood with blood. But Bankeis Zen was elusive. Hakuin had 80 successors, Bankei had none. And some people think that that was the most admirable thing about him.  I   The Buddhist Attitude of Change  In Buddhism, change is emphasized. First, to unsettle people who think that they can achieve permanance by hanging on to life. And it seems that the preacher is wagging his finger at them and sayingyou know, like the Scotch preacher, one day saying to Sunday congregation, So all the preachers, together, say Dont cling to those things. So then, as a result of thatand Im going to speak in strictly Buddhist termsthe follower of the way of Buddha seeks deliverance from attachment to the world of change. He seeks nirva, the state beyond changewhich the Buddha called the unborn, the unoriginated, the uncreated, and the unformed. But then, you see, what he finds out is that, in seeking a state beyond change, seeking nirva as something away from Sasrawhich is the name for the wheelhe is still seeking something permanent. And so, as Buddhism went on, they thought about this a great deal. And this very point was the point of division between the two great schools of Buddhismwhich, in the south, were Theravada, the doctrine of the Thera, the elders, sometimes known, disrespectfully, as the Hnayna. Yana means a vehicle, a diligance, or a ferryboat. This is a yana, and I live on a ferryboat because thats my job. Then there is the other school of Buddhism, called the Mahyna. Maha means great, hina little. The great vehicle and the little vehicle. Now, what is this? The Mahynas say, Youre little vehicle just gets a few people who are very, very tough ascetics, and takes them across the other shore to nirva. But the great vehicle shows people that nirva is not different from ordinary life. So that, when you have reached nirva, if you think, Now I have attained it. Now I have succeeded. Now I have caught the secret of the universe, and I am at peace, you have only a false peace; you have become a stone buddha. You have a new illusion of the changeless. So it is said that such a person is a pratyekabuddha. That means private buddha: Ive got it all for myself. And in contrast with this kind of pratyekabuddha, who gains nirva and stays there, the Mahynists use the word bodhisattva. Sattva means essential principle; bodhi, awakening. A person whose essential being is awakened. The word used to mean junior buddha, someone on the way to becoming a buddha. But in the course of time, it came to mean someone who had attained buddhahood, who had reached nirva, but who returns into everyday life to deliver everyday beings. This is the popular idea of a bodhisattva: a savior. And so, in the popular Buddhism of Tibet and China and Japan, people worship the bodhisattvasthe great bodhisattvasas saviors. Say, the hermaphroditic Guanyin. People loved Guanyin because shehe/she, she/hecould be a buddha, but has come back into the world to save all beings. The Japanese call he/she Kannon, and they have, in Kyoto, an image of Kannon with one thousand arms, radiating like a great aureole all around this great golden figure. And these one thousand arms are one thousand different ways of rescuing beings from ignorance. Kannon is [a] funny thing. I remember one night when I suddenly realized that Kannon was incarnate in the whole city of Kyoto; that this whole city was Kannon. That the police department, the taxi drivers, the fire department, the mayer and corporation, the shopkeepersin so far as this whole city was a collaborate effort to sustain human life, however bumbling, however inefficient, however corruptit was still a manifestation of Kannon with its thousand arms, all working independently, and yet one. So they revere those bodhisattvas as the saviors whove come back into the world to deliver all beings. But there is a more esoteric interpretation of this. The bodhisattva returns into the world. That means he has discovered that you dont have to go anywhere to find nirva. Nirva is where you are, provided you dont object to it.  II   Willing to Die  Changeand everything is change; nothing can be held on toto the degree that you go with a streamyou see, you are are still, you are flowing with itbut to the degree you resist the stream, then you notice that the current is rushing past you and fighting with you. So swim with it, go with it, and youre there. Youre at rest. And this is, of course, particularly true when it comes to those moments when life really seems to be going to take us away, and the stream of change is going to swallow us completely. The moment of death. And we think, Oh-oh, this is it. This is the end. And so at death we withdraw, say No, no, no, not that. Not yet, please!  But actually, the whole problem is that there really is no other problem for human beings, than to go over that waterfall when it comes. Just as you go over any other waterfall, just as you go on from day to day, just as you go to sleep at night. Be absolutely willing to die. Now, Im not preaching. Im not saying you ought to be willing to die, and that you should muscle up your courage and somehow put on a good front when the terrible thing comes. Thats not the idea at all. The point is that you can only die well if you understand this system of waves. If you understand that your disappearance as the form in which you think you are youyour disappearance as this particular organismis simply seasonal. That you are just as much the dark space beyond death as you are the light interval called life. These are just two sides of you, because you is the total wave. You see, we cant have half a wave. Nobody ever saw waves that just had crests, and no troughs. So you cant have half a human being, who is born but doesnt die; half a thing. That would be only half a thing. But the propogation of vibrationsand life is vibrationit simply goes on an on, but its cycles are long cycles and short cycles. Space, you see, is not just nothing. If I could magnify my hand to an enormous degree so you could see all the molocules in itI dont know how far apart they would be, but it seems to me they would be something like tennis balls in a very, very large spaceand youd look when I move my hand like this, and say, For Gods sake, look at all those tennis balls! Theyre all going together. Crazy! And there are no strings tying them together. Isnt that queer? No, but theres space going with them. And space is a function ofor its an inseparable aspect ofwhatever solids are in the space. That is the clue, probably, to what we mean by gravity. We dont know yet. So in the same way, when those marvelous sandpipers come around herethe little oneswhile theyre in the air, flying, they have one mind; they move all together. When they alight on the mud, they become individuals and they go pecking around for worms, or something. But one click of the fingers and all those things are going Zzzhup! up into the air. They dont seem to have a leader, because they dont follow when they turn, they all turn together and go off in a different direction. Amazing. But theyre like the molocules in my hand. So then, you see, heres the principle: when you dont resist changeI mean over-resist, I dont mean being flabbywhen you dont resist change, you see that the changing world, which disappears like smoke, is no different from the nirva world. Nirva, as I said, means breathe out, let go of the breath. So in the same way, dont resist change; its all the same principle. So the bodhisattva saves all beings not by preaching sermons to them, but by showing them that they are delivered, they are liberated, by the very fact of not being able to stop changing. You cant hang on to yourself. You dont have to try to not hang on to yourself. It cant be done. And that is salvation. Memento mori, be mindful of death. Gurdjieff says in one of his books that the most important thing for anyone to realize is that you and every person you see will soon be dead. See, it sounds so gloomy to us because we have devised a culture fundamentally resisting death.   III   A Happy Death  I love the story of the conversation at an English country house at a dinner party, where the hostess started up the question of death and asked the various guests what they thought was going to happen to them when they die. And some thought about reincarnation, and others thought about different planes of being, and others thought they were going to be annihilated. But none of the guests had answered except Sir Roderick, who was a kind of a military type, but a very devout pillar of the Church of England. He was the church warden, chief, of the vestry in the local country parish. And the lady said, Sir Roderick, you havent said a word. What do you think is going to happen to you when you die? Oh, he said, Im perfectly certain I shall go to heaven and enjoy everlasting bliss. But I wish you wouldnt indulge in such a depressing conversation.  Its true, isnt it? Death, in the Western world, is a real problem. We hush it up. We pretend it hasnt happened. Our morticians, who are very smart commercial operators, know exactly whats expected of them. And they make death just awful by pretending it doesnt happen. See, what happensyou go to a hospital, and youre at the end; youve got terminal cancer. And all your friends come around, and they wear false smiles and they say, Cheer up, youll be alright. In a few days from now youll be back home, and well go out for a picnic again. The doctors have their bedside manners. See, a doctor is absolutely helpless with a terminal case. Because a doctor is, by social definition, a healer. Hes not allowed to help you die. Hes out of role, even thoughI meanhe may sneak behind the rules and do it. But hes got to heal you, so hes got to keep you, indefinitely, on the end of tubes and all kinds of things, while theres a certain grave demeanor to all this, and all the nurses are so pleasant and so totally distant, because they know this is death. And they may be frank with you, thats why they feel distant. Its not that theyre not concerned. Its not that they are heartless people. But that they just dont know how to be frank. Like lots of people, when they meet a drunk, they dont know what to do with a drunk. Because hes not behaving right. When youre dying youre not behaving right! Youre supposed to live! See? So we dont know what to do with a dying person. We dont get around that person and say, Listen. Now, listen, man. Listen, I got the news for you! Youre gonna die, and this is going to be great! Look, no more responsibilities! Dont have to pay those bills anymore! Dont have to worry about anything! Youre going to just die! And lets go out with a bang! Lets have a party! See? Well put some of that morphine in you so you wont hurt too much. Were going to prop you up in bed and were going to bring all our friends around, and were going to have champagne, and youre going to die at the end of it, see? And its going to be just marvelous! Just like being born!  See, when we have birth problemsseeall women used to think that birth had to be painful; it was good for them. It was one of those things you had to suffer, because youd been screwing around with people, and therefore, you had to have a child, and its going to hurt. And then the doctors got together and they scratched their heads, and a man called [Grante DeGreed [?]] said, No, birth doesnt hurt. Its natural. All youve got to do is talk these women into the idea that it doesnt hurt, and these so-called pains are just tensions, and that birth is great. Its not a disease, its not really something you ought to go to the hospital for. Because you associate hospitals with diseases and sickness. Birth isnt sickness. Alright, now lets do some new thinking. What about death? Is death sickness? Or is it a healthy natural event, like being born? Of course it is. So a little change in social attitude about this will fortify everybody else. If Im alone and all my relatives are moaning and pretending its going to be hard for me, Ive got to challenge the whole bunch of them. Get my dander up and say, Listen, damn you, I dont want all this thing around here. Youve got to take a different attitude about my death. Well, thats hard. But if everybody helps me, and we dowere all one bodythey all come around and say, Congratulations, youre going to die! Liberation! Liberation now, you see? Because, just before you dielook, I know very well a skillful priest, handling a person dying, can do this for them. But he has to talk very, very, very straight. And he has to say, Listen, these doctorsdont you pay any attention to them. Theyre trying to amuse you and deceive you. Youre going to die. This isnt terrible, but its just going to be the end of you, as a system of memories. And so youve got a great chanceright now, before it happensto let go of everything. Because you know its going to go, and this is going to help you. Its going to help you let go of everything. So if you have any possessions left, give them away. Give everything away. And if you have anything to say that you felt you ought to say before you diethat you are kind of hanging on to and its bothering yousay it.  I dont mean, necessarily, a last confession. But sayits said that Adlai Stevenson, shortly before he died, said that hed been making a monkey of himself because he didnt agree with the governments policy about something or other. You know? He had to get that off his chest, because he had a little thought in the back of his mind that things were catching up with him. You see? So the moment comes when this thing called death has to be taken completely. Not as some ghastly accident. Something thatoh, your friends are going to stay away because youre awful. I mean, sometimes, when people die, are in a very unpleasant physical condition. They dont smell good, they dont look good, and so on. But an enormous amount can be done with scientific methods to make things reasonably tidy; from a purely sensory point of view. But the main thing is the attitude that death is as positive as birth, and should be a matter for rejoicing, because death is the symbol of the liberation. There is a wonderful saying that Ananda Coomaraswamy used to quote: I pray that death will not come and find me still unannihilated. In other words, that man dies happy if there is no one to die. In other words, if the ego has disappeared before death caught up with it. But you see, the knowledge of death helps the ego to disappear because it tells you you cant hang on. So what we needif were going to have a good religion around, thats one of the places where it can start. Having, I dont knownowadays, I suppose, theyd call it the Institution for Creative Dying. But something like that. You can have one department where you can have [a] champagne cocktail party to die with, another department where you can have glorious religious rituals, and priests, and things like that; another department where you can have psychedelic drugs, another department where you can have special kinds of music. Anything, you know? All these arrangements will be provided for in a hospital for delightful dying. But thats the thing: to go out with a bang instead of a whimper.  IV   Raising the Alarm  I was talking a great deal yesterday afternoon about the Buddhist attitutde to change, to death, to the transience of the world, and was showing that preachers of all kinds stir people up in the beginning by alarming them about change. Thats like somebody, you know, actually raising an alarm, just in the same way as if I want to pay you a visit I ring the doorbell, and then we can come in and I dont need to raise an alarm anymore. So in the same way, it sounds terrible, you see, that everything is going to die and pass away, and here you are, thinking that happiness, sanity, and security consist in clinging on to things which cant be clung to, and in any case there isnt anybody to cling to them. The whole thing is a weaving of smoke. So thats the initial standpoint. But as soon as you really discover this, and you stop clinging to change, then everything is quite different. It becomes amazing. Not only do all your senses become more wide awake, not only do you feel almost that youre walking on air, but you see, finally, that there is no duality; no difference between the ordinary world and the nirva world. Theyre the same world, but what makes the difference is the point of view. And, of course, if you keep identifying yourself with some sort of stable entity that sits and watches the world go by, you dont acknowledge your union, your inseparatability, from everything else that there is. You go by with all the rest of the things. But if you insist on trying to take a permanant stand, on trying to be a permanant witness of the flux, then it grates against you, and you feel very uncomfortable. But it is a fundamental feeling in most of us that we are such witnesses. We feel that, behind the stream of our thoughts, of our feelings, of our experiences, there is something which is the thinker, the feeler, and the experiencer. Not recognizing that that is itself a thought, feeling, or experiece, and it belongs within and not outside the changing panorama of experience. Its what you call a cue signal. In other words, when you telephone, and your telephone conversation is being tape recorded, its the law that there shall be a beep every so many seconds. And that beep cues you in to the fact that this conversation is recorded. So, in a very similar way, in our everyday experience theres a beep which tells us this is a continuous experience which is mine. Beep! In the same way, for example, it is a cue signal when a composer arranges some music, and he keeps in it a recurrent theme, but he makes many variations on it. Or, more subtle still, he keeps within it a consistent style, so you know that its Mozart all the way along, because that sounds like Mozart. But there isnt, as it were, a constant noise going all the way through to tell you its continuousalthough, in Hindu music, they do have something called the drone. There is, behind all the drums and every kind of singing, something that goes Nnnneeeeeeoooooooiiiinnggg, and it always sounds the note which is the tonic of the scale being used. But in Hindu music, that drone represents the eternal Self, the Brahman, behind all the changing forms of nature. But thats only a symbol. And to find out what is eternal you cant make an image of it; you cant hold on to it. And so its psychologically more condusive to liberation to remember that the thinkeror the feeler, or the experiencerand the experiences are all together. Theyre all one. But if, out of anxiety, you try to stabilizekeep permanentthe separate observer, you are in for conflict.  V   The World as Void  Of course, the separate observerthe thinker of the thoughtsis an abstraction which we create out of memory. We think of the selfthe ego, ratheras a repository of memories; a kind of safety deposit box, or record, or filing cabinet place, where all our experiences are stored. Now, thats not a very good idea. Its more that memory is a dynamic system, not a storage system. Its a repitition of rhythms, and these rhythms are all part and parcel of the ongoing flow of present experience. In other words, first of all, how do you distinguish between something known now, and a memory? Actually, you dont know anything at all until you remember it. Because if something happens that is purely instantaneousif a light flashes, or, to be more accurate, if there is a flash, lasting only one millionth of a second, you probably wouldnt experience it, because it wouldnt give you enough time to remember it. We say in customary speech, Well, it has to make an impression. So, in a way, all present knowledge is memory, because you look at something, and for a while the rods and cones in your retina respond to that, and they do their stuffjiggle, jiggle, jiggle; its all vibrationand so as you look at things, they set up a series of echoes in your brain. And these echoes keep reverberating, because the brain is very complicated. First of all, everything you know is remembered, but there is a way in which we distinguish between seeing somebody here now, and the memory of having seen somebody else whos not here now, but whom you did see in the past, and you know perfectly well, when you remember that other persons face, its not an experience of the person being here. How is this? Because memory signals have a different cue attached to them than present-time signals. They come on a different kind of vibration. Sometimes, however, the wiring gets mixed up, and present experiences come to us with a memory cue attached to them, and then we have what is called a dj vu experience: were quite sure weve experienced this thing before. But the problem that we dont seedont ordinarily recognizeis that, although memory is a series of signals with a special kind of cue attached to them so that we dont confuse them with present experience, they are actually all part of the same thing as present experience; they are all part of this constantly flowing life process, and there is no separate witness standing aside from the process, watching it go by. Youre all involved in it. Now, accepting that, you seegoing with that; although, at first, it sounds like the knell of doomis, if you dont clutch it anymore, splended. Thats why I said that death should be occasion for great celebration. That people should say Happy death! to you, and always surround death with joyous rites, because this is the opportunity for the greatest of all experiences, when you can finally let go because you know theres nothing else to do. There was a kamikaze pilot who escaped because his planethat he was flying at an American aircraft carrierwent wrong, and he landed in the water instead of hitting the plane, so he survived. But he said afterwards that he had the most extraordinary state of exaltation. It wasnt a kind of patriotic ecstasy. But the very thought that, in a moment, he would cease to existhe would just be gonefor some mysterious reason that he couldnt understand, made him feel absolutely like a god. Well then, in Buddhist philosophy this sort of annihilation of oneself, this acceptance of change, is the doctrine of the world as the void. This doctrine did not emerge very clearly, very prominently, in Buddhism until quite a while after Gautama the Buddha had lived. We begin to find this, though, becoming prominent about the year 100 B.C., and by 200 A.D. it had reached its peak. And it was developed by the Mahyna Buddhists, and it is the doctrine of a whole class of literature which goes by this complex name: Prajpramit. Now, prajna means wisdom. Paramita, a crossing over, or going beyond. There is a small Prajpramit stra, a big Prajpramit stra, and then theres a little short summary of the whole thing called the hdaya, or Heart Sutra, and that is recited by Buddhists all over Northern Asia, Tibet, China, and Japan, and it contains the saying, That which is void is precisely the world of form, that which is form is precisely the void. Form is emptiness, emptiness is form, and so on, and it elaborates on this theme. Its very short, but its always chanted at important Buddhist ceremonies. And so, it is supposedby scholars of all kinds who have a missionary backgroundthat the Buddhists are nihilists; that they teach that the world is really nothing, there isnt anything, and that there seems to be something is purely an illusion. But, of course, this philosophy is much more subtle than that. The main person who was responsible for developing and maturing this philosophy was Nagarjuna, and he lived about 200 A.D.one of the most astonishing minds that the human race has ever produced. And the name of Nagarjunas school of thought is Madhyamaka, which means, really, the Doctrine of the Middle Way. But its sometimes also called the Doctrine of Emptiness, or nyavda, from the basic word nya, or sometimes nya has -ta added on the end, and that -ta means -nessemptiness.  VI   Voiding the World  Well, then, emptiness means, essentially, transience. Thats the first thing it means. Nothing to grasp, nothing permanent, nothing to hold on to. But it means this with special reference to ideas of reality, ideas of God, ideas of the Self, the Brahman, anything you like. What it means is that reality escapes all concepts. If you say there is a God, that is a concept; if you say there is no God, thats a concept. And Nagarjuna is saying that, always, your concepts will prove to be attempts to catch water in a sieve, or wrap it up in a parcel. So he invented a method of teaching Buddhism which was an extension of the dialectic method that the Buddha himself first used. And this became the great way of studying, especially at the University of Nalandawhich has been reestablished in modern times, but, of course, it was destroyed by the Muslims when they invaded Indiathe University of Nalanda, where the dialectic method of enlightenment was taught. The dialectic method is perfectly simple. It can be done with an individual student and a teacher, or with a group of students and a teacher. And you would be amazed how effective it is when it involves precious little more than discussion. Some of you, no doubt, have attended tea groups, blab-labs, in which people are there, and they dont know quite why theyre there, and theres some sort of a so-called resource person to disturb them. And after a while they get the most incredible emotions, and somebody tries to dominate the discussion of the group, say, and then the group kind of goes into the question of why hes trying to dominate it, and so on and so forth. Well, these were the original blab-labs, and they have been repeated in modern times with the most startling effects. That is to say, the teacher gradually elicits from his participant students what are their basic premises of life. What is your metaphysic, in the senseIm not using metaphysic in a kind of a spiritual sense, but what are your basic assumptions? What real ideas do you operate on as to what is right and what is wrong, what is the good life and what is not? What arguments are you going to argue strongest? Where do you take your stand? The teacher soon finds this out, for each individual concerned, and then he demolishes it. He absolutely takes away that persons compass. And so they start getting very frightened, and say to the teacher, All right, I see now. Of course I cant depend on this, but what should I depend on? And unfortunately, the teacher doesnt offer any alternative suggestions, but simply goes on to examine the question, Why do you think you have to have something to depend on? Now, this is kept up over quite a period, and the only thing that keeps the students from going insane is the presence of a teacher who seems to be perfectly happy, but is not proposing any ideas. Hes only demolishing them. So we get, finallynot quite finallyto the void, the nya. And what then? When you get to the void there is an enormous and unbelievable sense of relief. Thats nirva. Whew, as I gave a proper English translation of nirva. Aaaah. Great. So they are liberated, and yet they cant quite say why or what it is that they found out, so they call it the void. But Nagarjuna went on to say, You mustnt cling to the void. You have to void the void. And so the void of nonvoid is the great state, as it were, of Nagarjunas Buddhism. But you must remember that all that has been voided, all that has been denied, are those concepts in which one has hitherto attempted to pin down what is real. In Zen Buddhist texts they say, You cannot nail a peg into the sky. And so, to be a man of the sky, a man of the void, is also called a man not depending on anything. And when youre not hung on anything you are the only thing that isnt hung on anythingwhich is the universe. Which doesnt hang, you see. Where would it hang? It has no place to fall on, even though it may be dropping; there will never be the crash of it landing on a concrete floor somewhere. But the reason for that is that it wont crash below because it doesnt hang above. And so there is a poem, in Chinese, which speaks of such a person as having above, not a tile to cover the head; below, not an inch of ground on which to stand. And, you see, thiswhich, to people like us, who are accustomed to rich imageries of the divine; the loving father in heaven, who has laid down the eternal laws. Oh word of God incarnate, oh wisdom from above, oh truth unchanged unchanging, oh light of life and love. The wisdom from which the hallowed page, a lantern for our footsteps, shines out from age to age. See, so thats very nice. We feel we know where we are, and that its all been written down, and that, in heaven, the Lord God is resplendant with glory, with all the colors of the rainbow, with all the saints and angels around, and everything like that. So we feel that its positive, that weve got a real rip-roaring gutsy religion full of color and so on. But it doesnt work that way.  VII   Consider Death Now  The more clear your image of God, the less powerful it is, because youre clinging to it; the more its an idol. But voiding it completely isnt going to turn it into what you think of as void. What would you think of as void? Being lost in a fog, so that its white all around, and you cant see in any direction. Being in the darkness. Or the color of your head as perceived by your eyes. Thats probably the best illustration that we would think of as a void; because it isnt black, it isnt white, it isnt anything. But thats still not the void. Take the lesson from the head. How does your head look to your eyes? Well, I tell you: it looks like what you see out in front of you, because all that you see out in front of you is how you feel inside your head. So its the same with this.  And so, for this reason, the great sixth patriarch, Huineng, in China, said it was a great mistake for those who are practicing Buddhist meditation to try to make their minds empty. And a lot of people tried to do that. They sat down and tried to have no thoughts whatever in their minds. Not only no thoughts, but no sense experiences, so theyd close their eyes, theyd plug up their ears, and generally go in for sensory deprivation. Well, sensory deprivation, if you know how to handle it, can be quite interesting. Itll have the same sort of results as taking LSD, or something like that, and there are special labs made nowdays where you can be sensorily deprived to an amazing degree. But if youre a good yogi this doesnt bother you at all. Sends some people crazy. But if you dig this world, you can have a marvelous time in a sensory deprivation scene. Also, especially, if they get you into a condition of weightlessness. Skin divers, going down below a certain number of feetI dont know exactly how far it isget a sense of weightlessness, and at the same time this deprives them of every sense of responsibility. They become alarmingly happy, and they have been known to simply take off their masks and offer them to a fish. And of course they then drown. So if you skin dive, you have to keep your eye on the time. You have to have a water watch or a friend whos got a string attached to you. If you go down that far, and at a certain specific time you know you have got to get back, however happy you feel, and however much inclined to say, Survival? Survival? What the hells the point of that? And this is happening to the men who go out into space. They increasingly find that they have to have automatic controls to bring them back. Quite aside that they cant change in any way from the spaceship. Now isnt that interesting? Can you become weightless here? I said a little while ago that the person who really accepts transience begins to feel weightless. When Suzuki was asked, What is it like to have experienced satori enlightenmenthe said, Its just like ordinary everyday experience, but about two inches off the ground. Zhuang Zhou, the Taoist, said, It is easy enough to stand still, the difficulty is to walk without touching the ground. Now why do you feel so heavy? It isnt just a matter of gravitation and weight. It is that you feel that you are carrying your body around. So there is a kan in Zen Buddhism: Who is it that carries this corpse around? Common speech expresses this all of the time: life is a drag. I feel like Im just dragging myself around. My body is a burden to me. To whom? To whom? Thats the question, you see? And when there is nobody left for whom the body can be a burden, the body isnt a burden. But so long as you fight it, it is. So then, when there is nobody left to resist the thing that we call changewhich is simply another word for lifeand when we dispel the illusion that we think our thoughts, instead of being just a stream of thoughts, and that we feel our feelings, instead of being just feelings; its like saying, you know, to feel the feelings is a redundant expression. Its like saying, Actually, I hear sounds, for there are no sounds which are not heard. Hearing is sound. Seeing is sight. You dont see sights. Sight-seeing is a ridiculous word! You could say just either sighting, or seeing, one or the other, but sightseeing is nonsense! So we keep doubling our words, and this doubling is comparable to oscillation in an electrical system where theres too much feedback. Where, you remember, in the old-fashioned telephonewhere the receiver was separate from the mouthpiece, the transmitterif you wanted to annoy someone who was abusing you on the telephone, you could make them listen to themselves by putting the receiver to the mouthpiece. But it actually didnt have that effect; it set up oscillation. It started a howl that could be very, very hard on the ears. Same way if you turn a television camera at the monitorhat is to say, the television set in the studiothe whole thing will start to jiggle. The visual picture will be of oscillation. And the same thing happens here. When you get to think that you think your thoughts, the you standing aside the thoughts has the same sort of consequence as seeing double, and then you think, Can I observe the thinker thinking the thoughts? Or, I am worried, and I ought not to worry. But because I cant stop worrying, Im worried because I worry. And you see where that could lead to. It leads to exactly the same situation that happens in the telephone, and that is what we call anxiety; trembling. But his discipline that were talking about, of Nagarjunas, abolishes anxiety because you discover that no amount of anxiety makes any difference to anything thats going to happen. In other words, from the first standpoint, the worst is going to happen: youre all going to die. And dont just put it off in the back of your mind and say, Ill consider that later. Its the most important thing to consider now, because it is the mercy of nature, because its going to enable you to let go and not defend yourself all the time,; waste all energies in self-defense.  VIII   Thunderous Silence  So this doctrine of the void is really the basis of the whole Mahyna movement in Buddhism. Its marvelous. The void is, of course, in Buddhist imagery, symbolized by a mirror, because a mirror has no color and yet reflects all colors. When this man I talked of, Huineng, said that you shouldnt just try to cultivate a blank mind, what he said was this: the voidnyatis like space. Now, space contains everythingthe mountains, the oceans, the stars, the good people and the bad people, the plants, the animals, everything. The mind in usthe true mindis like that. You will find that when Buddhists use the word mindtheyve several words for mind, but Im not going into the technicality at the momentthey mean space. See, space is your mind. Its very difficult for us to see that because we think were in space, and look out at it. There are various kinds of space. Theres visual space: distance. There is audible space: silence. There is temporal space: as we say, between times. There is musical space: so-called distance between intervals, or the intervals between tones, rather; quite a different kind of space than temporal or visual space. Theres tangible space. But all these spaces, you see, are the mind. Theyre the dimensions of consciousness. And so, this great space which every one of us apprehends from a slightly different point of viewin which the universe movesthis is the mind. So its represented by a mirror, because although the mirror has no color, it is for that reason able to receive all the different colors. Meister Eckhart said, In order to see color, my eye has to be free from color. So in the same way, in order not only to see, but also to hear, to think, to feel, you have to have an empty head. And the reason why you are not aware of your brain cellsyoure only aware of your brain cells if you get a tumor or something in the brain, when it gets sickbut in the ordinary way, you are totally unconscious of your brain cells; theyre void. And for that reason you see everything else. So thats the central principle of the Mahyna. And it works in such a way, you see, that it releases people from the notion that Buddhism is clinging to the void. This was very important when Buddhism went into China. The Chinese really dug this, because Chinese are a very practical people, and when they found these Hindu Buddhist monks trying to empty their minds and to sit perfectly still and not to engage in any family activitiesthey were celibatesChinese thought they were crazy. Why do that? And so the Chinese reformed Buddhism, and they allowed Buddhist priests to marry. And in fact, what they especially enjoyed was a stra that came from India, in which a laymanwho was a wealthy merchant called Vimalakrtiout-argued all the other disciples of Buddha. And of courseyou know, these are these dialectic arguments that are very, very intense thingsif you win the argument, everybody else has to be your disciple. So Vimalakrti, the layman, won the debate, even with Majur, who is the bodhisattva of supreme wisdom. They all had, you see, a contest to define the void, and all of them gave their definitions. Finally, Majur gave his, and Vimalakrti was asked, then, for his definition, and he said nothing, and so he won the whole argument. The thunderous silence.